NEW ISSUES IN REFUGEE RESEARCH 


Research Paper No. 189 

With a little help from our friends: 
a participatory assessment of social 
capital among refugees in Jordan 

Noel Calhoun 

Senior Community Services Officer 
UNHCR 
Amman, Jordan 


E-mail: calhoun@unhcr.org 


September 2010 



Policy Development and Evaluation Service 


Policy Development and Evaluation Service 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
P.O. Box 2500, 1211 Geneva 2 
Switzerland 


E-mail: hqpd00@unhcr.org 
Web Site: www.unhcr.org 


These papers provide a means for UNHCR staff, consultants, interns and associates, as well 
as external researchers, to publish the preliminary results of their research on refugee-related 
issues. The papers do not represent the official views of UNHCR. They are also available 
online under ‘publications’ at <www.unhcr.org>. 

ISSN 1020-7473 


Introduction 

As a part of its regular programme cycle, UNHCR Jordan establishes a diverse 
multifunctional team consisting of UNHCR and NGO partner staff to conduct an 
annual participatory assessment exercise with refugees. This assessment informs the 
office’s protection strategy, as well as the programme priorities for the coming year. 

In 2009, as the operation in Jordan entered a post-emergency phase, the office chose 
to undertake the participatory assessment around the theme of ‘social capital’. 
UNHCR wanted to gain a better understanding of the levels of social trust among 
refugees, as well as the refugees’ community structures, so that the operation could 
become increasingly focused on a community-based approach to refugee protection. 

This report examines the notion of social capital, the methodology of the assessment, 
as well as its main findings and recommendations. The assessment has challenged 
some of our assumptions about the refugees we serve in Jordan, as well as our 
understanding of the host community. With the strong support of senior management 
and the informed and enthusiastic engagement of the multi-functional team, UNHCR 
Jordan is now identifying new ways to support refugees in strengthening their social 
capital. 

The concept of social capital 

For the purpose of this assessment, social capital is defined as “social networks and 
associated norms of reciprocity and trustworthiness” (Putnam, 137). This theme was 
selected because of the role of social capital in promoting sustainable livelihoods and 
overall well-being, as well as its relevance to a community development approach to 
post-emergency protection and programming . 

Social capital is formed in a number of ways, including: 

• 
through social networks and connectedness, either vertical (patron/client) or 
horizontal (between individuals with shared interests) that increase people’s 
trust and ability to work together and expand their access to wider 
institutions, such as civic bodies; 
• 
through membership in more formalized groups which often entails 
adherence to mutually-agreed or commonly accepted rules, norms and 
sanctions; and 
• 
through relationships of trust, reciprocity and exchanges that facilitate cooperation, 
reduce transaction costs and which may provide the basis for 
informal safety nets amongst the poor. 
These forms of social capital formation are all closely interrelated. For example, 
membership to groups and associations can extend people’s access to and influence 
over other institutions. Likewise, trust is likely to develop between people who are 
connected through kinship relations or otherwise. 

1 



This paper refers to bonding and bridging social capital. Bonding social capital refers 
to social networks among refugees from the same country of origin, i.e., Iraqis with 
Iraqis, Somalis with Somalis. Bridging social capital refers to ties between refugees 
and the host community. 

Both types of social capital are important. Bonding social capital generally contributes 
to social support and personal well-being. In simple terms, we need friends from our 
own community to get along in life. Bridging social capital is particularly important 
for economic advancement, as people need these more distant ties to get new 
information, for example, about job opportunities or markets. 

For refugees, bridging social capital may have additional benefits, for example, in 
helping them to feel less foreign and isolated, giving them information about how to 
solve problems and access services in a new environment, and providing protection in 
cases of disputes or detention. 

In various documents describing the refugee situation in Jordan, UNHCR has 
previously made the assumption that social capital is weak. The urban refugee 
population is dispersed and lacks community representation. Poor economic 
conditions, the recent experience of ethnic conflict and associated psychological 
distress contribute to low levels of trust and community mobilization. 

According to this perception, wealthier Iraqis are not organized to support poor Iraqis. 
Ties with the host community are weak, due to Jordanians’ negative perceptions of 
Iraqis: the refugee influx raised the prices of housing and food, and they are a burden 
on public services. Furthermore, it is assumed that these educated, urban refugees are 
savvy consumers of information, which they derive from multiple sources. 

These assumptions may contain some or even a great deal of truth, but they are based 
on perceptions by humanitarian actors. They are not nuanced and have not been 
tested. Given the positive developments that have taken place in relation to Jordan’s 
protection space, we might hypothesize that some of these assumptions have now 
become outdated. 

Methodology 

The participatory assessment was conducted by a multifunctional team consisting of 
UNHCR and partner agency staff. The team included UNHCR staff from the 
following functional areas: field, community services, protection, registration, health, 
programme and resettlement. Partner staff were selected from agencies covering 
diverse sectors, and included persons from Terre des Homme (Italy), CARE, Mercy 
Corps, Noor al-Hussein Foundation, Jordan River Foundation and International Relief 
and Development. 

Efforts were made to include team members with varying levels of experience, so that 
more experienced staff could support less experienced staff in conducting the 
assessment. The team consisted of 26 persons (7 NGO, 19 UNHCR; 4 male, 22 
female). The team was broken down into sub-teams each consisting of 3-4 persons. 
Each sub-team was assigned to cover a particular geographic area. 

2 



The geographic areas targeted were the ones with the highest concentration of 
refugees according to BIS data. They included: 

• 
Amman East (Hashmi Shmali, Marka, Al-Taj), 
• 
Amman North (Tila Al-Ali, Umm Al-Summaq, Swaileh, Jobaiha, 
Abu-Nusair), 
• 
Amman Central (downtown, Jebel Hussain, Jebel al-Webdeh), 
• 
Amman South (Sahab, Abu Alanda, Al-Wehdat, Hai Nazal, Jabal 
al-Naser), 
• 
Zarqa, 
• 
Irbid, and,. 
• 
non-Iraqis. 
Each sub-team had a coordinator who took responsibility for seeing that the assigned 
activities were completed on time. Two experienced staff members were available as 
resource persons to support the coordinators and their sub-teams. 

All team members participated in a day-long preparation session which introduced the 
concepts of social capital and the assessment tool and gave teams an opportunity to 
practice using the tool. 

The methodology is based upon the World Bank’s Social Capital Assessment Tool, 
particularly the instrument that has been established for determining community 
profiles (see Grootaert and van Bastelaer, 2002). 

The community profile tool consists of the following components: 

Focus group discussions: The focus group discussions were conducted according to a 
participatory interview guide. The guide covers various issues: definition of 
community and identification of community assets; collective action and solidarity; 
social trust and integration; information and communication; and community 
leadership. 

Each sub-team was assigned to conduct focus group discussions separately with adult 
men, adult women, female youth (15-24) and male youth (15-24). If possible, a 
separate group with the elderly (age 60+) was organized. One team member led each 
focus group discussion, while the other two team members observed and took notes. 
Notes were prepared according to an agreed format. 

Community visits: The sub-team was asked to visit places identified as common 
meeting places by the community in order to gain a sense of the special 
characteristics of these places. 

Key informant interviews with respected leaders/community activists: When the team 
learned about respected leaders/community activists, it was assigned to conduct key 
informant interviews with them to learn about their connections and how they support 

3 



4 
the community. It was expected that each sub-team would conduct 2-3 key informant 
interviews. Notes were prepared according to an agreed format. 
The assessment proceeded according to the plan. Over a period of 4 weeks the team 
conducted 31 focus group discussions with 304 persons. Because of difficulties in 
identifying respected persons in the refugee community, only ten were conducted (3 
female, 7 male). 
Female 
Youth 
Male 
Youth 
Female 
Adult 
Male 
Adult 
Elderly 
female 
Elderly 
male 
Total 
FGD 
Irbid 6 8 9 14 3 5 5 
Zarqa 9 6 12 10 4 
Non-Iraqi 4 12 13 3 6 4 
Amman East 9 11 12 8 7 4 5 
Amman North 6 6 12 6 4 
Amman Central 10 9 11 15 4 
Amman South 10 9 15 12 0 12 5 
Totals 50 53 83 78 13 27 31 
Total number of 
participants in 
FGDs = 304 
Following the gathering of information, the entire multifunctional team assembled for 
a half-day session to share and analyze the results of their work and to make 
recommendations based on their findings. At that time, each sub-team gathered 
together to fill in a simple sheet to quantify the amount of social capital, both bonding 
and bridging, for each group they interviewed. This template required that they enter a 
yes/no answer to a series of questions about social capital. 
The following analysis is based upon the combined quantitative results, a review of 
the notes of 31 focus group discussions and 10 key informant interviews, and the 
team’s discussions during the session on 17 November. 
Overall, the teams conducting the focus group discussions were able to use the 
interview guide successfully. Testing the interview guide in two pilot focus group 
discussions helped us to create a workable interview guide 
Initially many of the groups were surprised at the topics under discussion. When they 
meet UNHCR staff, refugees are used to discussing other topics, particularly 
resettlement, financial assistance and medical care. It was not always easy to change 
the subject. 
An independent research team may have been able to encourage a stronger focus on 
the topic of social capital and generated a larger amount of information with a similar 
input of resources. Nevertheless, it is important for UNHCR to be part of changing the 
topic, signaling that UNHCR and NGO partners are committed to working with 
communities, not just to addressing individual problems. 
In general, teams found it more difficult to manage the focus group discussions with 
adult men. Some groups were quite negative and impatient with the subject at hand. 

5 
Facilitators used breaks, snacks and humor to lighten the atmosphere, and eventually 
all the focus group discussions yielded results relevant to the topic. In future, it will be 
important to include more men in the team of facilitators, since within the cultural 
context, they may find it easier to manage difficult discussions with adult men. 
The sub-teams were asked to conduct focus group discussions with youth aged 15-24 
and adults aged 25-59. The age parameters of the youth group were not appropriate. 
Younger youth aged 15-18 are generally in secondary school, and their experience of 
social life is quite different from older youth aged 19-24 who have a broader variety 
of daily activities, such as working informally, attending some form of education or 
courses, or being idle. For the purposes of studying social capital, it would be better to 
separate adolescents (15-18), youth (19-24) and adults (25-59). 
Quantitative results 
a) Bonding and bridging social capital by sex, age, and nationality 
The following tables measure bonding social capital (among refugees) and bridging 
social capital (between refugees and the host population) according to a 6 point scale, 
and are broken down by age and sex. 
Iraqis 
4.3 
3.8 
3.8
4.5 
3.0 
2.8 
2.7 
2.7 
2.8 
2.7 
6 4 2 0 2 4 6 
Male Youth 
Female Youth 
Male Adults 
Female Adults 
Elderly 
Bridging Bonding 
Sudanese 
5 
4
4
4
4 
2 
3 
2 
6 4 2 0 2 4 6 
Male Youth 
Female Youth 
Male Adults 
Female Adults 
Elderly 
Bridging Bonding

6 
The main findings here can be summarized as follows: 
• For all refugees, bonding social capital is stronger than bridging social 
capital. This is what we would expect. 
• Iraqis have greater bridging social capital than the other refugee groups. This 
is also what we would expect given that compared to the other groups, Iraqis 
have greater linguistic, ethnic and cultural affinities with the host population. 
• Among Iraqis, female adults and male youth have higher levels of bonding 
social capital, while female youth and adult males have considerably less. 
• Among Iraqis, the level of bridging social capital is relatively even among 
the age and gender groups. 
• Among non-Iraqis, the Sudanese have strong bonding capital with much 
weaker bridging capital. The Somalis are the strongest in terms of bonding 
social capital, but have zero bridging social capital. 
b) Social capital by geographic area 
The following table shows the levels of social capital by geographic region, with non- 
Iraqis considered separately. The scores are out of 24 maximum points. For Iraqis, the 
mean score for bonding social capital is 16.5 points and for bridging social capital is 
11 points. 
Somalis 
5 
4 
5
5 
3 
6 4 2 0 2 4 6 
Male Youth 
Female Youth 
Male Adults 
Female Adults 
Elderly 
Bridging Bonding

7 
Social capital by geographic area (Total 24 points) 
0
5 
10 
15 
20 
Amman 
North 
Amman 
South 
Amman 
East 
Amman 
Central 
Irbid Zarqa Somalis Sudanese 
Bonding 
Bridging 
Iraqis 
Bonding 
Mean 16.5 
Bridging 
Mean 11 
The main findings can be summarized as follows: 
• South, East and Central Amman have a similar patter of high bonding social 
capital and low bridging social capital. 
• North Amman and Irbid have higher bridging social capital than bonding 
social capital. 
• Zarqa has the highest level of social capital overall; it is above the mean for 
both bonding and bridging social capital. 
• As noted above, Somalis have the highest bonding social capital, but 
absolutely no bridging social capital. Sudanese are closer to the Iraqi pattern. 
c) Aspects of social capital 
The following charts show how various aspects of social capital were scored by the 
three nationality groups. Each is scored out of a maximum of 4 points. 
0 1 2 3 4 5 
Information networks 
Friendship 
Mutual support 
Social ties 
Trust in lending/borrowing 
Collective action 
Bridging 
Bonding 
Iraqis 

8 
0 1 2 3 4 5 
Information networks 
Friendship 
Mutual support 
Social ties 
Trust in lending/borrowing 
Collective action 
Bridging 
Bonding 
Somalis 
0 1 2 3 4 5 
Information networks 
Friendship 
Mutual support 
Social ties 
Trust in lending/borrowing 
Collective action 
Bridging 
Bonding 
Sudanese 
The main findings can be summarized as follows: 
• For Iraqis, information networks (in this case related to finding informal 
employment) are nearly equally strong within the community and with the 
host community. 
• Iraqis score 4/4 points on friendship within their community, and also have a 
high score 3/4 points on friendship with Jordanians. 
• In emergencies, Iraqis are more likely to seek mutual support within their 
community than from the Jordanian community, though many Iraqis also 
find support within the Jordanian community. The score is a moderate 2/4 
points. 
• Despite Iraqis’ friendships, they do not promote these ties through social 
visits as much as would be expected. Among Iraqis, the score for friendship 
is 4 points, while the score for social visits is 2.5; for friendship with 
Jordanians, the score is 3.3, while the score for social visits is only .7 points. 

9 
• Iraqis broadly trust one another in terms of borrowing and lending money, 
with a score of 3 points. They trust Jordanians less—1.5 points. 
• Iraqis have very low scores for collective action. 
• Somalis are also weak in collective action, but are strong in all other areas of 
bonding social capital. They have no social connections with Jordanians. 
• Sudanese are weak in social ties and collective action, but are strong in all 
other areas of bonding social capital. They have Jordanian friends 
d) Information sources 
The following charts show the use of various media by age and gender. The scoring is 
as follows: 
0 = never use this information source 
1 = monthly use 
2 = weekly use 
3 = daily use 
Male 
Youth 
Female 
Youth 
Male 
Adults 
Female 
Adults Total 
Newspaper 0.5 0.5 1 0.9 0.7 
Radio 0.4 1.3 1.5 2 1.3 
Television 3 3 3 3 3 
Internet 2.3 2.3 1.4 1 1.7 
Information Sources by Gender and Age 
0 
0.5
1 
1.5
2 
2.5
3 
Male Youth Female 
Youth 
Male 
Adults 
Female 
Adults 
Total 
Newspaper 
Radio 
Television 
Internet 
Daily 
Weekly 
Monthly 
Never 
The main findings can be summarized as follows: 
• Newspapers are used rarely – less than once per month on average 
for the entire population. 

• 
Radio is used slightly more than once per month—more by adult 
refugees and less by youth. Male youth almost never listen to the 
radio. 
• 
Everyone watches television every day. 
• 
Refugee youth use the internet weekly, but adults use the internet 
only monthly. 
Qualitative findings 

This section of the paper summarizes the main points arising in the focus group 
discussions, . The section presents the topics covered in each focus group discussion 
in the same order as in the discussion guide. Extracts from the focus group discussion 
notes are included to illustrate the variety of responses. 

a) Definition of community and identification of community assets 

Refugees have diverse opinions about how they feel in relation to the Jordanian 
community, with some feeling more integrated and others feeling estranged. 

Most of the refugees feel that they are not part of the community – 
especially in the city – even those who are married to Jordanians. 
They feel that they are the most persecuted in the community and the 
married ones state that their families-in-law make them feel that 
they’re not equal to Jordanian women. (Irbid, adult females) 

Refugees feel a little bit a part of the community, and that Jordan is 
their second country. (Irbid, male youth) 

We have a good relationship with Jordanians as they respect old 
people. We share a common cuisine. (East Amman, elderly person) 

In general Iraqis have good relations with Jordanians. (North Amman, 
female youth) 

Iraqis feel that they are a part of the Jordanian community, especially 
those that have been in Jordan for a very long time. (South Amman, 
adult female) 

They also have diverse opinions about relations within their own community. The 
people in North Amman were particularly negative about their community: 

Iraqis have no sense of community. Iraqis don’t like each other. They 
hide information from each other and rarely visit one another. (North 
Amman, adult female) 

Sometimes Iraqis avoid each other as they cause trouble to each other. 
(North Amman, female youth) 

Sudanese and Somalis both say that the racial difference makes it harder for them to 

10 



integrate within the Jordanian community. 

We prefer to stay at home since we are subjected to verbal harassment 
from our Jordanian and Palestinian neighbors due to our ethnicity. 
(Somali, adult female) 

We feel discriminated against because of our complexion… 

Jordanians call us black. (Sudanese, male youth) 

b) Collective action and solidarity 

In cases of emergencies, refugees have social resources to help them to cope. Some 
rely only on other refugees, while others turn to Jordanians for assistance. 

In cases of emergency, we depend on family and friends, but not our 

neighbors. (Central Amman, adult male) 

Neighbors help each other, whether Jordanians or Iraqis. Sometimes 

Jordanians are more thoughtful. (North Amman, adult female) 

When we have a medical emergency, we usually call the nearest Iraqi 
friends or Jordanian neighbors. They are always ready to support. 
(East Amman, adult female) 

When we have a medical emergency, we usually call each other. We 
are always ready to support each other. We can leave our children 
with other Somali families. If there is a detention for one of the Somali 
persons, we go to our Somali friend (…) who has resided in Jordan for 
a long time. He has connections in Jordan. (Somali, adult female) 

The Jordanian neighbor helped us twice when my family members 

were detained. (Stateless, male youth) 

Refugees generally have difficulties in resolving disputes with Jordanians. They are 
reluctant to go to the police to report a Jordanian, since they perceive that the police 
might give attention to the refugee’s residency status in the country. The main 
strategy is to avoid conflict. Several mentioned that if there are serious disputes with 
neighbors or landlords, they have to move to a new home. 

If there are problems, Jordanians stick with Jordanians, and Iraqis 

stick with Iraqis. (Zarqa, adult male) 

Usually disputes arise in the neighborhoods, like a problem about the 
kids while they play outside or stealing water. It’s rare to find people 
to help resolve the dispute. Most people would avoid the problem and 
keep quiet. (Central Amman, adult male) 

One lady had a dispute with her neighbor’s children in the street. She 
raised the issue with the neighbors, but the parents of the child said 
they can’t do anything about it. (Zarqa, female youth) 

11 



If there’s a dispute, we usually ask for help from the landlord, or else 
we leave the area. (East Amman, male youth) 

There is little collective action. Most groups could not think of any examples of 
grassroots activity, where refugees come together to organize activities, such as 
tutoring for children, football teams or cultural activities. Refugees’ precarious legal 
status in Jordan makes them want to maintain a low profile, and they believe that 
gathering in groups will attract unwelcome attention. Common responses included: 

We don’t do such things as it needs money. (Non-Iraqis, adult female) 

Due to our bad psychological state, we do not organize any cultural or 
recreational activities. Mostly we stay at home and do not go out 
unless we need to. (Irbid, adult male) 

There are a few exceptions, though, mostly involving sports for male youth: 

Sometimes we arrange trips and football matches. The football 
matches are every Friday. We have Jordanian and Palestinian friends, 
so it’s not restricted to Iraqis. (Zarqa, male youth) 

Most young men get together to play sports. They organize sports 
activities, mainly football. There is an upcoming football tournament 
organized by Yarmouk University. Iraqis have formed a team and they 
will represent the Iraqi community in this tournament. (Irbid, male 
youth) 

There is a football pitch in Marka owned by Amman Municipality. 
There is also a place in Hashmi where Iraqi youth gather to play. You 
have to register, and it costs 5-10 JD per hour. (East Amman, male 
youth) 

Though the question was looking for spontaneous, grassroots community 
organization, some refugees answered making reference to community centers and 
NGOs: 

We mix with other Iraqis through the activities organized by NGOs, 
such as the CCA. This was not available back in Iraq. (South Amman, 
female youth) 

c) Social trust and integration 

As demonstrated by the quantitative analysis, most Iraqis have friendships in Jordan, 
both with other Iraqis and with Jordanians. Some of these friends are very supportive. 

One girl’s aunt is friends with a Jordanian who provides them with 
housing for free. (Zarqa, female youth) 

Some Iraqis have frequent social visits with their friends, while many others do not. 

Many girls see their friends only at the community centers. (Zarqa, 
female youth) 

12 



Visiting is very rare, as men are most of the time inside the house. 
Women avoid visiting each other in the presence of men. Plus visiting 
costs money. (East Amman, adult female) 

Women don’t visit each other very often because the men don’t work. 
The men are at home most of the time. Women have many 
responsibilities and are in low spirits. (North Amman, adult female) 

We visit each other once a week at home. We can’t afford to go out. 
(Central Amman, adult male) 

We visit each other on a daily basis. (East Amman, male youth) 

There is high trust in borrowing and lending among Iraqis, and also among non-Iraqis. 

Iraqis have good relations with each other and they borrow from each 
other a lot. Maybe 20-200 JD. (South Amman, adult female) 

We trust each other a lot in terms of borrowing and lending. We 
borrow small amounts 5-20 JD. (Somali, adult male) 

In some cases, this trust extends to Jordanians. However, the quantitative analysis 
shows that there is considerably less trust of Jordanians when it comes to borrowing 
and lending money. Some people also mentioned purchasing groceries on credit at the 
neighborhood shop. 

You can borrow money from anyone, whether they are Iraqi, 
Jordanian or Palestinian. (Zarqa, female youth) 

We borrow most of the time from Jordanian or Iraqi neighbors, the 
local shop or friends. It happens on a monthly basis. (East Amman, 
adult female) 

Some refugees mentioned that the regularity of financial assistance was a factor in 
easing borrowing and lending. 

You pay back as soon as you receive the monthly financial assistance. 
(Zarqa, adult male) 

The lenders know when people get their monthly financial assistance. 
(Zarqa, male youth) 

People pay back after they get their financial assistance. They can 
wait around a month to pay back. (East Amman, adult female) 

This led to some expressions of concern about financial assistance. 

There should be more auditing of financial assistance, as a lot of 
families take it and they are not eligible. (East Amman, adult female) 

It is difficult to generalize about the amounts being borrowed. Groups identified small 
amounts of 5JD, intermediate amounts of around 100JD, and even amounts up to 300500JD. 
The general payback period is 1-2 months. It is rare for someone to default. 
Some groups, particularly adult males, reported that they refuse to borrow money as a 

13 



point of principle. 

Some people do borrow from each other, but we do not do it. And we 
do not involve our wives in this. (South Amman, adult male) 

To measure social integration, the questionnaire also examined use of the Jordanian 
dialect, inter-marriage and general feelings of security in Jordan. Most Iraqis are now 
able to use the Jordanian dialect, as was evident to the Jordanian facilitators during 
the focus group discussions. Many persons were able to switch back and forth 
between Jordanian and Iraqi dialects. The Iraqis explained their use of Jordanian 
dialect as follows: 

We use Jordanian dialect to keep a low profile. (Irbid, male youth) 

If a Jordanian recognizes an Iraqi by his dialect, he will start asking 
questions about Sunni or Shi’a, which annoys the Iraqis. So we choose 
to speak Jordanian dialect. (South Amman, adult female) 

We use Jordanian dialect when speaking with Jordanians because 
there are Iraqi words that the Jordanians won’t understand. (Zarqa, 
adult male) 

We can speak Jordanian dialect very well. (East Amman, female 
youth) 

The elderly were the only group less likely to use Jordanian dialect. 

It is very difficult. (East Amman, elderly) 

Though inter-marriage is often a positive sign of integration, Iraqis’ negative attitudes 
toward inter-marriage with Jordanians were widespread. 

Iraqi ladies married to Jordanian men have been suffering ever since 
they entered Jordan. We are against inter-marriage. (Zarqa, adult 
female) 

We don’t encourage inter-marriage as a lot of Iraqi females suffer and 
have been humiliated by Jordanian families. (East Amman, adult 
female) 

We find it [inter-marriage] very hard. For men the Jordanian woman 
is very strong and demanding. And the marriage is becoming less 
frequent. (Central Amman, adult male) 

We don’t prefer it [inter-marriage]. The Jordanian husband may 
humiliate the Iraqi woman. (North Amman, female youth) 

Though half of us are married to Jordanians, we don’t encourage this 
marriage. If it was our decision from the beginning, we would not have 
gone through this marriage. (Irbid, adult female) 

The few dissenting voices came from male youth. 

14 



There is no difference between Iraqis and Jordanians in marriage as 
long as there is a sense of love and understanding between a couple. 
(North Amman, male youth) 

We have no problem with inter-marriage with Jordanian girls. (Irbid, 
male youth) 

Overall, refugees expressed a sense of security living in Jordan. 

We feel generally safe. (Irbid, female youth) 

We feel secure and don’t find the police too intimidating. (Zarqa, male 
youth) 

In general, we feel safe and secure. (Central Amman, female youth) 

e) Information and communication 

As shown in the quantitative analysis, few refugees read newspapers. Of those who do 
read newspapers, they mainly mentioned the free weekly newspapers with 
advertisements circulated widely in Jordan. This includes al-Waseed and Mumtaz. 

Radio is only moderately popular. Stations mentioned as frequently used include: 
Amman FM, Farah, Sawot al-Ghad, BBC. The al-Walkeel program was mentioned as 
a favorite. Television is extremely popular. Every group said that they watch 
television daily. When asked for how many hours per day, the responses indicated the 
prevalence of television-watching among the population: 

24 hours. (East Amman, elderly person) 

TV is on all the time. (Central Amman, adult male) 

We’re constantly watching television. (Central Amman, adult female) 

We watch from half an hour up to five hours per day, mostly movies. 
(South Amman, male youth) 

Popular channels include: MBC, FOX, al-Jazeera, al-Sharqiah, al-Bablyiah, al-
Baghdadiah, al-Rafidein.. Generally older people prefer to watch news, while younger 
people watch movies. 

Internet use is more popular among youth than among adults. Somali youth are 
particularly frequent users of the internet. Popular internet sites include: Hi 5, 
Facebook, Ain Kawa (blog for Iraqis), Chat Hi Iraq, Iraquna Wahad, Messenger, and 
YouTube. 

Refugees mentioned using email for staying in contact with relatives, but also noted 
that the price of phone calls had gone down, making this a preferred form of 
communication. 

15 



f) Community leadership 

It was not difficult for the Somalis to identify respected persons in their community. 
The Somalis have joined together to select representatives to speak to outsiders— 
especially UNHCR and NGOs—on their behalf. These representatives tend to be 
mature, Arabic-speaking persons and those who have been in Jordan for a relatively 
long period. 

After a great deal of prodding and posing the question in various ways, Iraqis in Zarqa 
were able to identify respected persons. These persons were diverse: a male tailor, a 
female community center worker and a man who is the son of a tribal leader in Iraq. 

None of the other groups were able to identify any respected Iraqi community 
members at all, though the facilitators tried three different versions of the question in 
order to try to elicit a response. There were few explanations of this: 

In general the Iraqi community in Irbid does not have strong 

relationships as they are scattered all around Irbid. (Irbid, adult male) 

It is possible that the refugees were reluctant to name respected persons because this 
might identify them as being wealthy and therefore ineligible for assistance. However, 
the team generally perceived that the Iraqis genuinely had few community leaders or 
respected community members. 

The Iraqi activists are usually working as volunteers in NGOs. They 

help each other instead of helping the poor. It’s a closed circle. (North 

Amman, adult female) 

Key informant interviews 

Because the refugees identified only three respected persons in the community, the 
team opted to use a snowball methodology to identify other key informants. Two 
additional key informants known to UNHCR as activists in the Iraqi community 
helped to identify other persons active in supporting fellow Iraqis. The following 
persons were interviewed: 

· male doctor in Amman 
· male professor in Amman 
· female pharmacist in Amman 
· male business leader in Amman 
· male community worker in Amman 
· female community worker in Amman 
· male minority group leader in Amman 
· male tailor in Zarqa 
· female community worker in Zarqa 
· male respected community member in Zarqa 
The respected persons in the community gained their position either through their 
socio-economic status, family status (e.g., son of a tribal leader), and in some cases 

16 



through their outgoing personalities (e.g., the tailor, community worker). None of 
them was elected or selected by groups in a formal manner. 

The respected persons engage in a variety of activities to support fellow members of 
the Iraqi community. The male community member in Zarqa helps to resolve family 
and neighborhood conflicts, and also solicits financial support from wealthy Iraqis 
when someone is in dire need. 

The female pharmacist receives financial and in-kind donations from her neighbors 
and friends, and she uses these to give free or low-cost drugs to needy Iraqis identified 
by another trusted acquaintance (friend of a friend) who is a community worker. The 
female community workers in Zarqa and Amman provide Iraqis with information and 
referrals to available services. 

Respected persons generally do not work together in groups. Instead individuals 
mobilize informal networks of friends. For example, the doctor in Amman can call 
upon other doctors to help out in providing medical services for poor Iraqis. These 
persons come to his attention through another acquaintance who is a community 
worker. The business leader also gives support to families identified by an 
acquaintance is a community worker. 

The minority group leader of the Sabean community in Amman is an exception. He 
maintains lists of Sabeans in Jordan and organizes group events for the community. 
For example, he liaises with the Ministry of Interior to obtain permission and security 
for conducting religious rituals at appropriate sites and then organizes his community 
for these rituals. The professor was also trying to start a group of professionals from 
Ninevah Province, but so far activities are limited. 

Other respected persons say that they do not belong to clubs, associations or groups. 
“I don’t go out in public,” said the businessman. He and the doctor both said that they 
meet other people in their private diwan. Other people from the community, as well as 
guests from Iraq, come to visit them in their diwan to discuss various issues. While 
they sometimes discuss the issue of Iraqis in Jordan, the situation within Iraq is more 
frequently the topic of conversation. 

Respected persons prefer to give assistance anonymously through an intermediary. 
This is seen as more appropriate for religious, political and practical reasons. As a 
matter of religious duty, many Muslims like to give assistance anonymously. They 
may give money to a trusted intermediary to distribute from the unknown benefactor. 
They may bring items for distribution to the poor, either to NGOs or to poor 
neighborhoods directly. 

Community members speak of people coming with big cars and distributing clothes, 
blankets or food, and they do not know the name of the person giving the assistance. 
The political conditions inside Iraq, as well as the protection situation in Jordan, 
reinforce this tendency to give anonymously. 

The businessman described how under the regime of Saddam Hussein, he was warned 
by the government not to distribute assistance from his business premises, as this 
made it look like he was trying to take on the role of the state. He changed his model 
of assistance distribution to give anonymously through intermediaries in poor 

17 



communities. 

This is the same model he is using in Jordan, where because they are foreigners under 
scrutiny, even professional, wealthy Iraqis prefer to keep a low profile. Finally, 
wealthy people do not want to become too well known in the community, or else they 
will face demands that they cannot meet. 

In general, there was little interest in creating or joining groups. The respected 
persons said that they did not have time for this, and they prefer to maintain their 
current means of supporting the community. 

As a result of the lack of group formation, many key informants had low levels of 
awareness about services available to Iraqi refugees in Jordan. In particular the 
wealthier informants were poorly informed about many issues, including the legal 
framework for protection of Iraqi refugees in Jordan and the availability of health 
services. Because of this, they cannot competently advise their compatriots on where 
to seek various services or ensure that their support is complementary to existing 
services. 

General analysis 

Age, gender and social capital 

According to information gathered in the course of this assessment, adult females 
have more social capital than adult men. Possible explanations for this include: 

• 
More women work as volunteers with NGOs. This has given them 
the opportunity to meet more people in their work. 
• 
More women go to community centers, as activities there are often 
directed at them. Women go to the community centers for psychosocial 
support, light vocational training, and other training courses. 
Fewer activities are designed for men. As a result, women meet 
more people. 
• 
Because they lack the right to work legally and informal work is 
scarce and irregular, men do not have the opportunity to develop 
social ties through the workplace, which is where they would 
naturally forge these connections. This change in their social roles 
has a negative psychological impact on men, and they tend to 
isolate themselves from one another. 
• 
Women face fewer protection risks when being in public. They are 
less likely to be detained for illegal stay than men are. As a result, 
women go out more. 
• 
However, male unemployment also negatively impacts on women’s 
ability to maintain social ties. They cannot have their female 
friends come over to visit because of the man’s presence in the 
house. 
18 



Female youth have less social capital than adult women or male youth. Possible 
explanations include: 

• 
Families protect their daughters and do not let them go out to 
socialize. Some girls mentioned that their situation would be 
broadly similar if they were living in Iraq. 
• 
Few female youth are working, so they do not have the opportunity 
to develop these ties in the workplace. 
• 
Female youth are not involved in sports, which brings together 
male youth on a regular basis. 
Male youth have more social capital than adult men. Possible explanations include: 

• 
Male youth who live with their parents are generally given freedom 
to go out and socialize. 
• 
Many male youth have developed social ties through attendance at 
Jordanian schools. 
• 
Male youth who live with their parents do not have the 
responsibility to work. It is typical within the cultural context for 
young adults to remain in their parent’s household and be 
dependent on them. 
• 
Male youth have not experienced the loss of social role as their 
fathers have. As a result, they are less inhibited in developing social 
relations. 
Geography and social capital 

Among Iraqis, Irbid and North Amman have a strikingly different pattern of social 
capital than in other areas. In both Irbid and North Amman, relations among Iraqis are 
relatively poor (below the bonding mean), while relations with Jordanians are stronger 
(above the bridging mean). Why is bridging social capital stronger than bonding 
social capital stronger in these two areas? Possible explanations: 

• 
Iraqis in Irbid and North Amman do not live in a cluster together. 
They are quite dispersed over a large geographic area. Therefore, 
they do not meet together as often or rely on one another for 
support. 
• 
At one point, it seems like there were some emergent leaders 
among Iraqis in Irbid. Then discord developed, and now the 
community is highly divided and mistrustful. 
• 
Many Iraqis in Irbid moved there because they wanted to be near 
the university, and they tend to be highly educated. Iraqis in North 
Amman tend to be better off than those in South, East and Central 
Amman. Perhaps middle-class Iraqis are able to integrate more 
19 



easily with their middle-class Jordanian neighbors. The Jordanians 
in these middle-class neighborhoods also have more to offer to 
their Iraqi neighbors: financial resources, information, job 
opportunities, and connections in high places. 

• 
While it makes sense that middle class refugees would have a 
greater incentive to integrate with a middle-class host community, 
it is harder to explain why they would have weaker ties among 
themselves. Perhaps they intentionally reduce their visibility by 
trying to meld with the host community. 
• 
It is also possible that the middle-class Iraqis used to be much 
wealthier when they were living inside Iraq. They do not want to 
show other Iraqis their reduced social circumstances, so they avoid 
contacts. 
Zarqa has an unusually high level of social capital. It is perceived that Iraqis have 
been in Zarqa for a long time (before the 2003 war) and have developed strong links 
with the host community. Perhaps other factors also play a role, such as a strong 
community center, key personalities, and equality of economic circumstances. 

Diversity 

Somalis have the strongest level of bonding social capital among the three groups 
examined. They are a small minority group whose members have selected to live 
together in a compact geographic area (Hai al-Masarwi, Jebel Amman). They have a 
strong culture of mutual support. However, they have absolutely no bridging social 
capital. 

This may be attributed to several factors. They live in a neighborhood populated 
mainly by single Egyptian men, so they have few opportunities to meet Jordanian 
neighbors in a natural way. They experience racism and discrimination in public 
places. Many do not speak Arabic well. 

Sudanese also have strong levels of bonding social capital, but they live scattered 
throughout Amman and Zarqa, which makes it harder for them to support one 
another. They have stronger links to Jordanians mainly because they live in more 
typical Jordanian neighborhoods and they speak Arabic. 

The key informant interview with a Sabean community leader indicated a high level 
of organization among that minority group. Their leader has regular contacts with the 
Jordanian authorities to facilitate religious rites. He also has information about 
families who will be coming to Jordan, even before their arrival from Iraq. Minority 
groups can organize themselves more easily. 

Policy and programme recommendations 

a) Create opportunities for skilled Iraqis to support other community members 

20 



• 
Currently many wealthier Iraqis are supporting other members of 
their community. Their means of support is usually anonymous and 
involves making a donation through a trusted intermediary. There 
has been much discussion of how to develop a closer link between 
the humanitarian agencies serving poor Iraqi refugees and the 
wealthier elements of the community, since the humanitarian 
agencies could undoubtedly benefit from their expertise, 
connections and resources. 
• 
However, humanitarian agencies are also concerned about 
maintaining their political neutrality and policies of nondiscrimination. 
Links with certain influential individuals may 
compromise neutrality or create perceptions that humanitarian 
agencies are favoring Iraqis from specific political, religious or 
ethnic backgrounds. This risk has so far been seen to outweigh the 
potential gain from ties with wealthier Iraqis. 
Suggested activities: 

• 
Iraqi Fund. An NGO could establish a fund to solicit such 
donations from wealthy Iraqis and possibly other sources. The 
board of the fund could include some of the trusted intermediaries 
who have already been identified. The fund could give assistance 
for a specific purpose, such as higher education, on a transparent, 
competitive basis. 
• 
Medical advisory committee. Since medical professionals are 
identified on the basis of their academic qualifications and 
experience, rather than any ethno-political basis, humanitarian 
agencies could establish ties with them with much less risk. 
• 
Furthermore, there are many Iraqi doctors working legally in 
Jordan, and also a high demand for medical services among the 
population. An advisory committee comprising Iraqi doctors could 
support UNHCR and other partners in establishing health policies, 
identifying service-providers and negotiating favorable rates. They 
could be encouraged to provide their services free of charge or at 
reduced rates to Iraqi patients, and to mobilize other professionals 
for voluntary service to their community. The new Health Attache 
at the Iraqi embassy could be an important resource in launching 
this committee. 
b) Build refugees’ capacities for collective action 

While various indicators for social capital are relatively high, both Iraqis and non-
Iraqis have weak capacities for collective action. They do not form groups 
spontaneously to provide mutual support or solve common problems. 

In 2008-2009, IRD has implemented a project to promote community development, 
and though initially refugees did not understand its purpose or importance, the project 

21 



has slowly gathered momentum. It is normal for community development projects to 
take time, particularly when refugee communities have little experience in self-
organization. 

Suggested activities: 

• 
Sustain ongoing community development projects to allow them 
time to make gradual cultural changes. 
• 
Provide training in community development skills, such as group 
dynamics, community mobilization, and fundraising. 
• 
Create opportunities for refugee groups to access resources (such as 
micro-grants) for community-based projects on a competitive basis. 
c) Design community center activities to promote social capital formation 

Community centers are important engines of social capital formation. According to 
the assessment, many refugees meet one another, as well as Jordanians, through 
community centers. They do not meet so frequently in other places: There are low 
scores in all communities in terms of visiting one another at home. While community 
centers have a responsibility to provide social services to vulnerable persons, they 
have an equally important mission to build social ties and community participation. 

Suggested activities: 

• 
In community centers, give greater responsibility to refugees in 
choosing, implementing and evaluating activities. 
• 
Give priority to social and recreational activities that can build trust 
among refugees and with the host population. 
• 
Work with adult men to design activities that would include them 
more fully in the life of the community centers. Men have 
particularly low levels of social capital. 
• 
Actively recruit new participants into activities and prevent the 
formation of unhealthy cliques that may limit other refugees’ 
access to community centers. 
• 
Include Jordanians, Iraqis and non-Iraqis in leadership roles at 
community centers to encourage development of links among 
communities. 
d) Encourage the formation of sustainable community groups 

Because of the dispersed, divided and often isolated nature of refugee communities in 
Jordan, humanitarian agencies have understandably focused on provision of 
individual services, e.g., psychological counseling, individual advice on schooling, 
outreach through home visits, etc. While this approach is effective in delivering 

22 



essential services, it is not empowering or sustainable. Ultimately, refugees will need 
to find resources within their own communities or the host community to solve 
various problems. 

Suggested activities: 

• 
Form support groups to bring together persons with common 
concerns, such as parents of children with disabilities, couples, 
elderly, etc. Provide them sufficient support, information and 
training to continue meeting independent of NGO sponsorship. 
• 
Form groups of parents to identify and resolve issues related to 
their children’s education, including enrolment, performance, 
retention and protection issues. 
e) Use the internet for information dissemination and community mobilization 

While television is by far the most frequently used information source, the internet is 
gaining ground, especially among refugee youth. Compared to television, the internet 
is a much less expensive means of disseminating information, and it has the advantage 
of allowing inter-action and the formation of social ties. 

Suggested activities: 

• 
Create a web-site with information about availability of various 
services for refugees in Jordan. Link the site to other sites 
frequently used by Iraqis. 
• 
Use Facebook and/or Twitter to disseminate information to 
refugees about new policies affecting them and giving them a 
forum to raise general questions about policies. 
• 
Train refugees involved in community groups or support groups on 
how to use the internet and social networking for information-
sharing and mobilization. 
• 
Establish internet cafés in community centers to give more refugees 
the opportunity to use the internet. This could also be an income-
generating project for community centers. 
f) Reduce the negative impact of financial assistance on social capital formation 

The assessment, as well as UNHCR’s experience over recent months, has shown that 
financial assistance has both positive and negative impacts on social capital. On the 
positive side, the predictable stream of assistance facilitates borrowing and lending 
among refugees. 

People are more willing to lend money if they know they will be repaid when the 
borrower receives financial assistance from UNHCR at the end of the month. This is 
an important safety-net for families in case of emergency, and encourages trust in 

23 



borrowing and lending. 

On the negative side, some groups reported that the financial assistance made their 
Jordanian neighbors feel jealous, since Jordanians cannot get such assistance when 
they are poor or out of work. Some of the refugees met during focus group 
discussions were unable to focus on the topic at hand, often because the presence of 
UNHCR staff made them focus on issues of financial assistance and resettlement. 

In both these areas, some refugees perceive unfairness in the distribution of these 
valued resources. Nevertheless, the evaluation of the cash assistance program showed 
that the current beneficiaries are highly satisfied with this form of assistance.1 It is 
non-recipients and former recipients who appear to have concerns about the 
program’s fairness. 

This perception of unfairness is also evident in the increased number of complaints 
UNHCR received after re-assessing cases receiving financial assistance. The number 
of written complaints increased over 100% with the introduction of re-assessments of 
eligibility for financial assistance, from an average of 97 letters per month to 200 
letters per month. 

Various letters and interviews reveal complaints that other persons receiving 
assistance are not deserving of assistance, while they are. In some cases, people 
denounce others by name. Other studies suggest that means-testing, such as UNHCR 
does in establishing eligibility for financial assistance, undermines trust in institutions 
and contributes to weaker overall social trust.2 

Suggested activities: 

• 
Consider financial and social impact of establishing eligibility for 
financial assistance using open criteria, so that persons can be 
deemed eligible or ineligible in a more transparent way. 
g) Focus on building social ties between non-Iraqis and Jordanians 

Non-Iraqis have weak ties to Jordanian society. Some speak poor Arabic and have 
few opportunities to interact socially with Jordanians. Racial discrimination 
marginalizes the non-Iraqis. 

1 See “Cash Assistance Impact Surveys in Jordan and Syria,” UNHCR Jordan, 25 October 2009. 
2 According to Kumlin and Rothstein, in Sweden, persons who have applied for needs-tested benefits 
have lower levels of trust in both government and in other people. They perceive needs-testing, which 
involves bureaucratic discretion in application of rules, to be procedurally unfair. This damages trust in 
government and in other people more generally. “[T]here may be three psychological mechanisms at 
work here. First, people may draw inferences about others’ trustworthiness from how they perceive 
public service bureaucrats. If social workers, local policemen, public health workers, etc. act in such a 
way that they can not be trusted, then why should people in general be trusted? Second, if citizens, in 
order to get what they themselves deem necessary from the public services, have to engage in cheating, 
distorting vital information, and other forms of dishonest behavior, then why should people in general 
be trusted? Third, if you yourself, in order to get what you deem fair from public services, have an 
interest in engaging in questionable behavior, then not even people like yourself can be trusted, and 
then why should “other people in general” be trusted?” (p. 16). The importance of procedural justice to 
trust in institutions is highlighted in the academic literature on the social psychology of trust (see 
Sunshine and Tyler). 

24 



As a result, non-Iraqis have difficulty in using social networks for finding 
employment or solving various social problems. They are reliant upon UNHCR and 
NGOs for solving many protection problems. 

Suggested activities: 

• 
Include non-Iraqis in community center activities together with the 
host population. 
• 
Organize Jordanians to mentor non-Iraqi families, orienting them to 
life in Jordan. 
h) Highlight the positive qualities of the Jordanian host population 

Some media have focused on the negative impact of Iraqis in Jordan (inflation, 
overburdened public services), and this has fed the perception that Jordanians are 
dissatisfied with the Iraqi presence. In the practice of everyday life, however, many 
Iraqis experience the Jordanian host community as supportive and hospitable. This is 
a good sign for the long run: The host community has the capacity to accept Iraqi 
refugees in their midst. 

Suggested activities: 

• 
Publish web stories about Jordanian acts of hospitality. 
• 
Honor Jordanian neighbors and friends of refugees at World 
Refugee Day. 
• 
In advocacy activities with the Government of Jordan, note the 
contribution of the host community to refugee protection, 
assistance and community development. 
i) Consider new approaches to refugee participation in decision-making 

While participatory assessments such as this provide a wealth of information to 
support better decision-making by humanitarian actors, they do not meaningfully 
engage refugees in decision-making. Refugees arrive for focus group discussion with 
a list of the same complaints and demands they have given before. 

As a result of repeated assessments, as well as other frustrations with UNHCR 
(discontinued financial assistance, disappointments related to resettlement), some 
refugees were not enthusiastic about participating in the assessment. Talented, 
friendly facilitation by many of the team members helped to overcome this challenge 
with most of the groups, but not all of them. 

Unless steps are taken to improve the quality of participation, refugees will eventually 
become disillusioned with this annual exercise. The challenges with participatory 
assessment are perhaps greater in urban areas than in refugee camps. There are no 
established leadership structures, so engagement with the same persons is not 
sustained. 

25 



It is difficult to give feedback to the persons who came for the original assessment, 
since often the participants were identified randomly. The refugees do not have 
sufficient information about available resources, strategies and constraints to 
contribute to the analysis of their own situation. They do not contribute to policy 
direction or resource allocation. Ultimately, though this is a participatory assessment, 
all of the policy recommendations come from UNHCR or NGO staff; only one of 
these persons was an Iraqi. 

Suggested activities: 

• 
A small step would be to include more refugees, such as 
experienced volunteers, in the team conducting the participatory 
assessment in 2010. 
• 
With guidance from Headquarters, explore the possibility of 
implementing more radically participatory methodologies, such as 
citizens’ juries, for the development of UNHCR policies. (see 
Wakeford, et. Al., Pimbert and Wakeford, and Jefferson Center.) 
26 



REFERENCES 

Grootaert, Christiaan and Thierry van Bastelaer, 2001. Understanding and Measuring 
Social Capital: A Synthesis of Findings and Recommendations from the Social 
Capital Initiative. Washington, DC: The World Bank. 

Grootaert, Christiaan and Thierry van Bastelaer, 2002. Understanding and Measuring 
Social Capital: A Multidisciplinary Tool for Practitioners. Washington, DC: The 
World Bank. 

Halpern, David. 2005. Social Capital. Cambridge: Polity Press. 

Helliwell, John F and Robert D. Putnam. 2004. The social context of well-being. In 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London (359): 1435-1446. 

Jefferson Center, The. Citizens Jury Handbook. 2004. Available at www.jeffersoncenter.
org 

Kumlin, Staffan and Bo Rothstein. 2005. “Making and Breaking Social Capital: The 
Impact of Welfare State Institutions.” Comparative Political Studies, vol. 38, no. 4: 
339-365. 

Pimbert, Michel P. and Tom Wakeford. 2002. Prajateerpu: A Citizens Jury/Scenario 
Workshop on Food and Farming Futures for Andhra Pradesh, India. IIED, London 
and IDS, Sussex. 

Putnam, Robert D. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American 
Community. New York: Simon and Schuster. 

Putnam, Robert D. 2007. E Pluribus Unum: Diversity and community in the Twenty-
first Century. In Scandinavian Political Studies, vol. 30, no. 2: 137-174. 

Sunshine, Jason and Tom Tyler. 2003. “Moral Solidarity, Identification with the 
Community, and the Importance of Procedural Justice: The Police as Prototypical 
Representatives of a Group’s Moral Values” in Social Psychology Quarterly, v. 66, 
no. 22: 153-165. 

UNHCR Jordan. 25 October 2009. “Cash Assistance Impact Surveys in Jordan and 
Syria.” 

Wakeford, Tom et. al. 2007. “The jury is out: How far can participatory projects go 
towards reclaiming democracy?” in Handbook of Action Research (second edition). 

27 



