 

 

Findings from the Inter-
Agency Child Protection and 
Gender-Based Violence 

Assessment in the Za’atari 
Refugee Camp 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Photo: UNICEF/2012/Malkawi 

 

2013 

 

 

Child Protection and Gender-Based 
Violence Sub-Working Group Jordan 


 

Table of contents 

 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY……………………………………………………………………………………………. 2 

 

KEY RECOMMENDATIONS………………………………………………………………………………………. 5 

 

BACKGROUND AND METHODOLOGY………………………………………………………………………. 7 

 

KEY FINDINGS…………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 11 

 

1) Access to information and services……………………………………………………………… 11 


 

2) Exploitation of community members and income generating activities… ….. 15 


 

3) Children without parental care (UASC)……………………………………………………….. 17 


 

4) Children associated with armed forces and armed groups………………………… 18 


 

5) GBV and other forms of violence………………………………………………………………… 20 


 

IMMEDIATE AND LONG-TERM RECOMMENDATIONS ………………………………………………. 28 

 

 

 


Executive Summary 

 

This report details an assessment carried out in December 2012 to gain a deeper 
understanding of the main Child Protection (CP) and Gender-Based Violence (GBV) concerns 
of Syrian refugees in Za’atari Camp. As a number of protection services are currently 
available in the camp, the assessment had the primary objective of providing a practical 
direction to prevention and response activities in 2013. The assessment focused on 
reported and perceived patterns of threats, as well as knowledge and analysis of existing 
prevention and response to CP and GBV issues. Additionally, the report highlights 
recommendations on how these issues can be addressed in the humanitarian context to 
inform inter-agency programming. 

 

The assessment was conducted by a task force assembled by the CP and GBV Sub-Working 
Group in Jordan. The Task Force members adapted three main tools for data collection to 
ensure triangulation of information: Key Informant (KI) interviews; focus group discussion 
(FGD) interviews, and a Safety Audit. 

 

Below is a summary of the key findings of the assessment: 

 

Access to information: The majority of respondents reported that for the community in the 
camp, the main sources of information, including information on available services, are 
friends, neighbours and family in Jordan as well as those remaining in Syria; service 
providers were also mentioned to a lesser extent. 

 

Access to services: Health, food, NFIs distribution and education were mentioned as 
services people were most aware of. Lack of disaggregated services for males and females 
(e.g. in distribution lines) as well as distance to services were reported as factors hindering 
girls and women from accessing services. Girls, women and to a lesser degree, boys, may 
face difficulties in accessing services where they are not permitted to do so by their families. 
Respondents perceive that women and men fear being stigmatized and this negatively 
affects their access to certain types of services. People with physical or mental disabilities 
and female-headed households were mentioned as the main groups that are excluded from 
services. 

 

Exploitation of children and adults: Economic hardship is evident, and exacerbates the 
already existing practice of child labour as a means to financially support families. 
Respondents reported that boys are being used to sell goods and to beg in the camp. Girls 
are also involved in selling goods, but to a lesser extent. It was also reported that girls and 
boys are working as cleaners inside the camp. In such cases, an adult is hired, but children 
carry out the work. Men are known to be offered work by people outside the camp and are 
being “bailed out” largely for this purpose. 

 


Children without parental care (unaccompanied1 and separated2 children - UASC3): In the 
camp, 342 unaccompanied children and 307 separated children are registered with UNHCR. 
Respondents noted that children in the community living without any adult care (child 
headed households) are generally either referred by the community to an NGO specialized 
in working with children or entrusted to someone in the community who can care for them. 

1 Unaccompanied children are those separated from both parents and other relatives and are not being cared for by an adult who, by law 
or custom, is responsible for doing so. This means that a child may be completely without adult care, or may be cared for by someone not 
related or known to the child, or not their usual carer e.g. a neighbour, another child under 18, or a stranger. 

2 Separated children are those separated from both parents, or from their previous legal or customary primary caregiver, but not 
necessarily from other relatives. These may, therefore, include children accompanied by other adult family members. 

3 UASC stands for unaccompanied and separated children. The term ‘minor’ is discouraged due to its lack of legal definition. 

 

 

Children associated with armed forces and armed groups: A few respondents mentioned 
they had heard of children living in the camp, mainly boys aged 15-18, that had been 
working for or had been used by armed forces or armed groups in Syria. Some had heard of 
children that had returned back to Syria to join an armed group. The child’s own decision 
was mostly cited as the reason for returning to Syria. 

 

Gender-based violence (GBV) and other forms of violence in the community: According to 
respondents, domestic violence is the most prevalent type of violence, and it most affects 
girls aged 12-18. This is followed by civil violence (e.g. demonstrations in the camp) affecting 
mainly boys, aged 12-18. Children were identified as contributing to committing acts of 
violence, criminal acts and vandalism of communal infrastructure (schools etc). In terms of 
locations identified as most likely for violence to occur, home (tent) and the latrine/shower 
facilities were identified for girls as the highest risk locations, while for boys, home (tent) 
and the main gate of the camp were identified. For women, home and distribution points 
were mentioned as areas where violence is highest, while for men distribution points and 
the main gate of the camp were identified. 

 

Domestic Violence (i.e. spouse-spouse and parent-child): According to the respondents, 
women and girls are more likely targeted for domestic violence than men and boys, 
although in focus group discussions prevalence of domestic violence against boys was also 
highlighted. Male spouses and male parents were mentioned as the main perpetrators of 
domestic violence, although other family members, such as mothers-in-law, were also 
identified among perpetrators of violence. When asked to whom survivors of violence 
would reach out for support, girls and boys were reported to seek support from other family 
members (e.g. mothers, grandmothers). Women might seek help from other family 
members as well as friends. Men would most likely not seek support, but in the event that 
they did, it would also be from family members (e.g. brothers). 

 

Sexual Violence: The majority of respondents said they had not heard of any incidences of 
sexual violence. However, respondents believed that women and girls are more likely to be 
targeted for sexual violence than men and boys. Home (tent) and common areas, such as 
the latrines/shower facilities were mentioned by respondents as areas where sexual 
violence may happen. Other community members were mentioned as the likely 
perpetrators, followed by family members. Girls who experience sexual violence were 
reported to seek support from other family members (e.g. mothers, grandmothers) or from 


an NGO, while boys were said to prefer seeking support from family members. Women 
might seek help from other family members or the clinic. Men would most likely not seek 
support, but if they did it would also be from family members (e.g. brothers). 

 

Early marriage and Marriage Practices: 15-18 years of age is considered the normal age 
range for females to get married in the Syrian community, while 18-25 is the normal age for 
males. While the majority of the respondents did not know of any children from the camp 
that have married or were planning to get married since the opening of the camp, some 
respondents reported being aware of a few cases. There is a general agreement amongst 
respondents that families seem inclined to delay marriage of their girls due to the unstable 
environment and generally tend to reject marriage offers from outsiders because they 
believe these proposals are presented in a dishonourable way. 

 

Community Support Mechanisms: For children and adults alike, parents and relatives form 
the main support system. Religious leaders and community leaders are also considered as 
an important part of the support system for both groups. 

 

Safety concerns: There is a consistent discrepancy in the perception of safety in the camp in 
the daytime versus the night. Evenings and nights are considered the most insecure times of 
the day, particularly for girls and young women who leave their shelter to use public 
latrines. This is mainly due to the lack of lighting. 

 

Disabilities: Children and adults with disabilities face a range of additional challenges in the 
camp, particularly related to difficulties in accessing basic services. While there is limited or 
no indication that people with disabilities are being harassed or discriminated against, there 
are inadequate resources and services in the camps to support the basic needs of children 
and adults with disabilities, ensure their access and reduce their isolation. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Key recommendations 

(See detailed immediate and long-term recommendations from page 28) 

 

Recommendations for camp management: 

. Ensure sufficient camp lighting in strategic/insecure areas in camps, in particular 
around common areas such as WASH facilities and kitchens; 
. Strengthen and formalize refugee community-based security committees to 
promote self-protection by engaging communities to develop effective and 
representative protective structures, particularly to address domestic and sexual 
violence; 
. Ensure that distributions (e.g. food, NFIs) happen in a transparent manner and do 
not put individuals at risk of violence; 
. Ensure vulnerable households (e.g. female headed households and people with 
disabilities) and children at risk are placed closer to services in the camp; 
. Expand information sharing and increase access to services by the refugee 
population through the implementation of a camp-wide information and 
dissemination system; 
. Enhance security measures for non-residents accessing the camp in order to reduce 
risks of exploitation and abuse. 


Recommendations for WASH sector: 

. Mobilize the community to ensure WASH facilities in the camp, and in particular 
their safety features, are well maintained through the establishment of WASH 
committees; 
. Increase camp lighting in and around WASH facilities; 
. Ensure access to WASH facilities for children and adults with disabilities (e.g. ramps, 
appropriate toilet facilities). 


 

Recommendations for Health sector: 

. Strengthen coordination between the protection and health sectors, and ensure that 
all health providers are trained on case management, psycho social first aid, and 
protection referral pathway; 
. Continue to provide reproductive health services and counselling to child brides and 
girl mothers. 


 

Recommendations for Child Protection and Gender-Based Violence sector: 

. Enhance identification, monitoring and follow-up of children at imminent risk of 
abuse, neglect, violence and exploitation by their parents or caretakers and ensure 
inclusion in the Best Interests Assessment/Best Interest Determination process; 
. Continue to improve identification and case management for survivors of GBV; 
. Continue systematic identification of UASC through UNHCR Registration and 
reception processes, as well as active case finding in the community through 
awareness-raising; 
. Ensure that children engaged in child labour and their families/caregivers receive 
targeted assistance and support; 



. Ensure that issues related to early marriage are addressed though a community-
based approach, in particular though the involvement of community and religious 
leaders; 
. Provide sustainable solutions (including counselling, vocational training, life skills, 
formal and non-formal education) for boys and girls at risk of recruitment or use by 
armed forces or armed groups in Syria; 
. Sensitize the community on the detrimental impact of domestic violence and raise 
awareness on alternative disciplining mechanisms and mediation mechanisms; 
. Involve boys and men in preventing violence and addressing and challenging 
community acceptance of violence and harmful practices, particularly through the 
promotion of positive male role models; 
. Strengthen coordination between agencies providing services for children and adults 
with disabilities to ensure provision of assistance and access to rehabilitative 
services, and to promote the conditions for physical rehabilitation; 
. Strengthen coordination between agencies in preventing and responding to CP&GBV 
issues; 
. Continue to provide Code of Conduct trainings and ensure that all volunteers and 
staff of agencies working in the camp are trained in and have signed the Code of 
Conduct; 
. Continue to provide PSEA (Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse) training for 
all involved volunteers, staff and agencies in collaboration with GBV actors. 


 

 

 


Background & Methodology 

 

Background 

 

Since the start of the conflict in Syria in 2011, Syrians have been fleeing to Jordan on a daily 
basis. By 29 January, 2013, more than 222,000 people, including a significant number of 
women and children, have fled their homes in Syria to reach Jordan. The majority of the 
refugees are from Dara’a (87%), Homs, Damascus and Hama. Of the 171,033 currently 
registered refugees, 48 % are male; 52 % are females and; 55 % are children with 17 % of 
these below the age of four. Eighty percent of registered Syrians in Jordan reside in urban 
settings (the majority concentrated in Irbid, Ramtha and Mafraq), with the remainder living 
in Za’atari camp and other sites (Cyber City, King Abdullah Park). 

 

Given the steady influx of Syrian refugees, the Government of Jordan (GoJ) accelerated the 
opening of multiple sites, primarily a tented camp in the northern governorate of Mafraq, 
referred to as Za’atari Camp with additional settlement centers in Cyber City and King 
Abdullah Park. The refugees living in tented camps, sites and host communities are provided 
with protection and humanitarian assistance by the Government of Jordan, UN agencies and 
NGOs. During flight or in Syria, individuals have often been separated from their families, 
increasing their vulnerability. In addition, the breakdown of traditional protection networks 
leads to an increased exposure to threats and reduced coping mechanisms. Many continue 
to face psychosocial distress as a result of experiencing violence and displacement. 

 

Although women and girls face greater risks of sexual and gender-based violence, men and 
boys are also exposed to abuse. Women and girls have identified rape and kidnapping as 
one of the primary reasons that families fled from Syria, but sexual violence is rarely 
reported by survivors due to security concerns and associated shame and stigma. 
Community members and service providers in the camp and at other sites have reported 
that domestic violence is emerging as a prominent issue within the refugee community, a 
trend often seen in emergencies as a result of increased stress levels from violence and 
displacement. The bail-out system, partially suspended in July 2012, still allows Jordanian 
citizens to guarantee for refugees so that they can leave camp and sites. As the process is 
not systematised and clear, it increases risks of exploitation, trafficking and sexual abuse. 

 

More than 55 % of those living in the camp and sites are children, the majority of whom fled 
Syria with immediate or extended family members. Most children have experienced or 
witnessed conflict-related violence and pre-existing protection issues, such as corporal 
punishment at home and in school in Syria. Many unaccompanied children, the majority of 
whom are adolescent boys between 14-17 years, voluntarily separated from their family 
due to protection/survival or economic reasons. Children who travelled alone and joined 
families while crossing the border face an increased risk of abuse and exploitation and may 
not receive appropriate care if they are not registered as being on their own. It is 
challenging to identify unaccompanied and separated children (UASC) and provide interim 
care for them, and maintaining contact with them can also be difficult. Many are leaving 
the camp and sites through the bail-out process or are otherwise going missing, however 
UAMs are only being bailed-out in coordination with UNHCR. Addressing concerns regarding 
child protection and gender-based violence is increasingly critical in this context. 


 

The Community Based Protection Working Group, led by UNHCR, was formed as the myriad 
of protection issues faced by the refugee population became rapidly evident. The Child 
Protection and Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies sub-Working Group (CP&GBV sub-
WG) was established in February, 2012 co-chaired by UNICEF, UNFPA and supported by 
Nour Al Hussein Foundation/Institute for Family Health. Its objective is to coordinate 
prevention and response to child protection and gender-based violence against children and 
adults affected by the crisis living in camps, sites and host communities. 

 

Methodology 

 

A Task Force was established under the umbrella of the CP and GBV sub-Working Group to 
develop and revise tools for the child protection and gender-based violence assessment in 
the camp and host communities. Participating members in the Task Force included UNICEF, 
UNFPA, UNHCR, IRC, UNWOMEN, UPP, JWU, Save the Children and Zenid. The assessment in 
Za’atari camp consisted of the first phase of the assessment plan, as the assessment in the 
host community will be finalised in late March. 

 

The assessment tool for the camp was designed with guidance from several leading CP and 
GBV resources including the Child Protection Rapid Assessment Toolkit (2011); the Inter-
Agency Emergency Child Protection Toolkit (2009); GBV Sample Situation Analysis Questions 
(2004); Inter Agency Standing Committee (IASC) Sub-working Group on Gender and 
Humanitarian Action (2008). 

 

A desk review was initially conducted to synthesize existing needs assessments, situational 
analysis of CP and GBV risks and trends in Syria, policies and legal frameworks addressing CP 
and GBV in Syria and Jordan and monthly reports submitted by service providers working in 
Za’atari Camp. 

 

The task force opted for a qualitative approach, following the guidance of global tools. The 
Task Force members adapted three main tools for data collection to ensure triangulation of 
information: key informant (KI) interviews; focus group discussion (FGD) interviews and a 
safety audit. A draft KI questionnaire was adapted and field tested during the regional Child 
Protection Rapid Assessment ToT in October and later revised by the Task Force. 

 

Purposive sampling was used for the assessment, which consisted of a group of people or 
communities purposefully selected based on a set of criteria in order to achieve a relatively 
complete picture of the situation. For data compiling purposes, the key informants (KI) were 
divided into three groups with equal representation of community members and service 
providers. 

 

KI interviews were conducted with 27 participants (15 males and 12 females), 
representatives of both the community and of service providers. The main selection criteria 
for community participants was based on their having lived in the camp/site for at least one 
month and playing an active role in their community. KI community members were selected 
amongst religious leaders; teachers; community-based protection network members; those 


engaged in cash for work (for example, sanitation workers) and; community volunteers who 
work in Child Friendly Spaces (CFS). Service providers were selected amongst members of 
government and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) within the following sectors of 
intervention: camp management; security; and representatives from the health, WASH, 
education, food and non-food items (NFIs), CP and GBV sectors. For the purpose of this 
assessment, Syrian assistant teachers and cash for work personnel were considered to be 
community members, rather than service providers. 

 

Following the KI interviews, a total of six focus groups discussions (FGDs) were held, two 
with adolescent girls and boys between the ages of 15-17 years; two with women and men 
between the ages of 18-24 years and two with women and men over 25 years of age . A 
safety audit was simultaneously conducted through a series of observations and interviews. 
Interviews with community members included adolescent girls and boys between the ages 
of 15-17 years; men and women between the ages of 18-24 years and; women and men 
over the age of 25 years. 

 

KI interviews and FGD were conducted by a team of trained staff, which included two men 
and five women from a number of organizations currently working in Za’atari. 

 

The key findings are mostly presented per the ordered sections of the questionnaire, but 
were revised slightly where necessary. Many questions in the KI questionnaire were 
answered with a variety of responses. Therefore, the percentages presented in this report 
were not calculated based on the full 27 respondents answers, but rather using the valid 
responses to each question, excluding ‘missing cases’ and ‘not applicable’ responses. 

 

Limitations of the camp-based assessment 

 

. The information provided in this report is based primarily on KI (Key Informant), FGD 
(Focus Group Discussions) with adolescent and adults from the community and KI 
interviews with service providers. It does not represent the views of the entire 
population or include representatives from all service providers in the camp, but 
rather provides an overview of priority child protection and gender-based violence 
concerns ; 
. Not all possible protection issues were selected as topics on the basis of the desk 
review and consultations; 
. Due to their sensitive nature, some issues related to GBV, in particular, were not 
posed directly, nor were they described using internationally recognised definitions, 
but were instead explored indirectly; 
. Limited information was collected on children and adults’ own coping 
mechanisms/resilience as this was not covered in the questionnaire. However, the 
report infers some information about coping mechanisms 
. The impact on the children and adults’ psychosocial well-being and issues children 
and adults may face as a result of the crisis were also not covered as other 
assessments have focused comprehensively4 on these issues. 


4 Displaced Syrians in Za’atari Camp; Rapid Mental Health and PSS Assessment, IMC and UNICEF, August 2012. 

 

 


Report of findings 

 

The findings presented in this report were drafted by a small reporting group (UNICEF, 
UNFPA and Save the Children) and reviewed and finalized by the Task Force as an inter-
agency effort. The tentative findings were compiled along with draft recommendations, 
which were then reviewed and edited by the Task Force and the Child Protection and 
Gender-based Violence field group in Za’atari. 

 

 


Key Findings 

 

1. Access to Information and Services 

 

1.1. Access to information 

 

Organisations in the camp are providing information on available services to the refugee 
population through awareness raising activities such as leaflets, sessions, trainings or 
directly through service provision. 

 

In order to gauge access to information 
for camp residents, interviewees were 
asked what they considered their most 
important sources of information within 
the camp. Figure 1 represents the 62 
responses received from KI regarding 
the most important sources of 
information within the camp. Fifteen 
(24%) KI reported that the community 
relied primarily on friends, neighbours 
and family in Jordan; followed by 11 
(18%) mentioning telephone/mobiles, 
while 9 (15%) television and 8 (13%) 
friends, neighbours and family in Syria. 

 

Longer-term camp residents have managed to bring in household commodities such as 
television sets and it is common for friends and neighbours to converge at a tent to watch 
the latest news in Syria. However, for purposes of information and services available within 
the camp, word-of-mouth appears to be the most common source of transmission. This may 
be due in part to the lack of other available mechanisms to access information. Only 5% of 
respondents mentioned service providers as a source of information. 

 

There is a need to implement a camp-wide information and dissemination system, including 
through key community members, in order to improve access to information, as well as 
access to services. 

 

1.2. Access to Services 

 

Since the opening of Za’atari camp, a number of organizations have been providing a range 
of services to the camp residents. Camp management and general coordination is under the 
responsibility of JHCO (Jordan Hashemite Charity Organisation) and UNHCR. WFP (World 
Food program) and SCI (Save the Children International) are responsible for food 
distribution, while JHAS (Jordan Health Aid Society), JHCO, and NRC (Norwegian Refugee 
Council) are responsible for distribution of non-food items. UNICEF, THW (German Federal 
Agency for Technical Relief) and ACTED (Agency for Technical Cooperation and 
Development) manage water and sanitation facilities, and hygiene in the camp. JHAS offers 
primary and reproductive health services, while the French, Moroccan, Italian and Saudi 


hospitals offer a range of health services. UNHCR and IRD (International Relief and 
Development) are responsible for community services in the camp. UNICEF, NRC, Right to 
Play, IFH/UNFPA, IMC (International Medical Corps), Finn Church Aid, Questscope, and 
Mercy Corps are involved in the provision of formal and non-formal education, including 
youth activities while UNHCR, UNICEF, UNFPA/IFH, IMC, SCI, UNWomen/INTERSOS and IRC 
(International Rescue Committee) provide protection services, including specialized CP and 
GBV services. 

 

 KIs reported that communities are 
mostly aware of services regarding 
health, food, Non-Food Items (NFIs), 
followed by Child Friendly Spaces 
(CFS). The first three are expected 
responses since they represent the 
most basic needs prioritized by 
displaced communities. The fact that 
they are aware of CFSs is a good 
indication of the outreach capacity 
such centres have in the camp. 

 

While not prioritized by KIs to a 
particularly high degree in terms of 
protection services, the FGDs 
highlighted that girls, boys and young women are likely to spend part of their time in CFSs, 
and Women and Youth centres. 

 

Interviewees were further probed on issues that might restrict people’s access to services in 
the camp and how they might affect different groups. 

 

Ten (34%) KIs conveyed that services where males and females were mixed hindered 
women’s access while nine (31%) mentioned it hindering girls’ access. Similarly, lack of 
female staff was also perceived as adversely affecting women’s and girls’ access by 
respectively 11 (39%) and six (21%) respondents. However, 10 (36%) of KIs did not consider 
mixed services an obstacle. 

 

Thirteen (42%) KIs conveyed that girls might face difficulties in accessing services because 
they are not permitted by their families to access services, while the same was reported for 
women by six (19%) and to a lesser degree for boys by three (10%) respondents. This may 
be attributed to social and cultural norms surrounding female roles, layered with concern of 
personal safety that ultimately limits their access to services. 

 


Distance of services was considered an issue 
primarily affecting women and girls by 15 (41%) 
and 12 (32%) respondents respectively. Issues of 
harassment by other community members while 
accessing services, particularly while walking to 
services, was highlighted during FGD, in particular 
when it comes to girls. 

“We hear a lot of harassment on our 
way to school from the young men” 

“I stopped going to school because of 
what I hear from the boys on my way 
to and from school” 


 FGD participants highlight issues of 
harassment in the camp 

 

 

Both KI and FGDs with men and boys further 
revealed that while men and boys mostly access 
distributions, they routinely experience overcrowding and fighting there. The Safety Audit 
also highlighted similar concerns with NFI distributions being referred to as “unsafe for our 
men and boys.” 

 

11 KIs (32%) said that inappropriate behaviour of workers towards beneficiaries was not 
considered an issue affecting access to services. However, this issue was identified as 
potentially hindering access to services for boys by eight (24%), for girls by seven (21%) and 
to a lesser extent for women by six (18%) KIs. The question was posed with the intent of 
exploring the issue of sexual harassment by workers (both humanitarian and refugee 
workers); however it seems to have been interpreted in a wider sense, and related more to 
workers being “rude” and “not respectful”. 

 

When questioned about whether beneficiaries were “asked to do something inappropriate 
to access services”, 17 (57%) KIs did not consider this an issue. However, it was identified as 
potentially hindering access to services for women by five (17%), boys by four (13%) and 
men by three (10%) KIs. This question was posed with the intent of exploring possible 
incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse by service providers. 

 

Feedback was provided regarding existing services not meeting the needs of girls, boys, 
women and men in the camp. Ten (28%) KIs did not consider this an issue while the gaps in 
existing services were mostly reported for girls and women, by eight (22%) each, and six 
(17%) for men and four (11%) for boys. 


 

Eight (26%) KIs reported that women might face particular fear of being stigmatized when 
accessing certain kind of services, while the same was reported for men by seven KIs (23%). 
In general, people not having influence on the type of available services was reported as an 
issue for women, girls and men respectively by eight (22%) and seven (19%) KIs. Eleven 
(30%) of KIs did not consider this as an issue. Generally, a lack of understanding on service 
availability was reported throughout age and gender categories. 

 

It is clear from responses to this section that girls and women were perceived as 
disproportionately affected in accessing services due to certain factors, such as distance, 
absence of female personnel, and permission from families. However other issues, such as 
disrespectful behaviour of workers, lack of influence over service provision and delivery, and 
fear of being stigmatized also affect men, and in certain cases boys. It can be argued that 
many of the issues affecting access to services for both females and males are related, at 
least to a certain degree, to gender roles. 

 

Among those most marginalized from 
accessing services, KIs identified persons 
with physical disabilities, female-headed 
households and persons with mental 
disabilities. 

 

The lack of access for those with 
disabilities was reiterated in the Safety 
Audit where community members 
shared that people with disabilities and 
the elderly relied heavily on families for 
assistance in accessing services, 


including for using toilet facilities. In some instances, there is positive community 
involvement in helping vulnerable persons and the Safety Audit cites an example of the 
community building a special latrine for a man on a wheelchair. 

 

2. Exploitation of Community Members and Income Generation Activities 

 

2.1. Child Labour 

 

The desk review solidified the understanding that child labour in Syria is common and that it 
is socially acceptable for children to work in order to support their families. The Syrian 
Commission for Family Affairs (SCFA) and UNICEF 2009 report on the Situation Analysis of 
Children (SITAN) in Syria states that although Syria has ratified the International Labour 
Organization (ILO) Convention on child labour, the practice is still prevalent in poorer 
regions. In addition, findings from the Interagency Rapid Needs Assessment (May 2012) 
found that children are encouraged by parents and caregivers to join the labour market 
since it might be easier for children to find jobs since adults need to secure a work permit. 
Currently, identified cases of child labour in Za’atri Camp are referred to UNHCR for further 
follow up (assessment, counselling and referrals to basic services if needed). 

 

The KI interviews uncovered a 
strong belief that children in the 
camp were used for financial or 
material benefits of others. Eighteen 
(67%) respondents asserted this 
while the remaining either 
disagreed or mentioned that they 
did not know if children were 
working or not. Eighteen (86%) KIs 
perceived the children being used 
for financial or material benefit to 
be boys while remaining three (11%) 
thought them to be girls. 

 

When asked to identify the various 
tasks that children were engaging in 
for material gain, out of 22 
responses for boys, 16 (73%) 
respondents perceived selling goods 
as the most common form of work 
for boys followed by two (9%) 
responses for begging and one 
response each (4.5%) for working as 
cleaners, construction work and 
standing in line for adults waiting to receive food or NFIs. Out of four responses for girls 
engaging in material work, two identified them as selling goods while one response each 
was given for begging and working as cleaners. Furthermore, in FGD sessions with both 


adolescent boys (15-17 years) and with young males (18-24 years), it was pointed out that 
some adults have asked boys to steal items from other tents. 

 

“We know a father in our street that 
is injured and cannot work, (he) 
used to send his 12 year old girl to 
gather bread and sell it afterwards. 
When people told him that she is 
being harassed he stated keeping in 
the tent. But now he is sending his 6 
years old girl instead thinking that 
people will not harass her. 
However, once this little girl was 
lost and could not get back to her 
tent.” 

A FGD sessions with adolescent girls 
highlighted cases of child exploitation in 
the camp 

 

Some KI respondents had a sense that children were 
being offered opportunities (work) outside of the 
camp. Nine (33%) respondents confirmed this 
happening in the camp, equally for boys and girls. 
FGDs highlighted that adolescent boys and young 
men are sometimes offered jobs and are bailed out 
from the camp to work with Jordanians. While FGD 
highlighted that offers to take girls out of the camp 
are usually connected to marriage proposals, there is 
a general sense that in the majority of cases these 
offers are not accepted. However, lack of adequate 
monitoring mechanisms at this time do not allow 
service providers to quantify or estimate adequately 
this situation. 

 

2.2. Income generation activities and Exploitation of Adults 

 

With regards to adults, 16 (59%) of the KI respondents asserted that outsiders were offering 
to take adults away from the camp, 
offering them jobs and other income-
generating alternatives. All respondents 
stated this only for adult men, while adult 
women were never mentioned. FGDs 
participants shared specific examples of 
Jordanians offering camp residents jobs in 
collecting olives, sewing, and working as 
hair-dressers and as guards in a farm. 

 

There are limited work opportunities in 
the camp for male adults. Cash-for-work 
opportunities are set at a standardized 
rate of JD1.000/hour. The majority of KIs 
reported that men in the camp are mostly 
employed by organizations, either as 
cleaners, construction workers or engaged 
in other kinds of work such as teaching. 
KIs also shared that men run small 
businesses. Male adult FGD participants 
shared that while men do leave the camp 
for work, a number of them returned 
because they did not like the work and/or 
because the cost of living outside the 


camp was too high. The FGDs also revealed that many men believe that “the majority have 
nothing to do,” in the camp and the same is believed to be true for adolescent boys. 

 

Women are also engaged in work opportunities. Majority of responses revealed women 
working as cleaners, engaging in small business opportunities and working with 
organizations in the camp. There was one response about a woman believed to have had 
sex for exchange of money (transactional sex). On the other hand, women participating in 
FGDs asserted that they never heard of such an issue in the camp. 

 

3. Children without parental care (unaccompanied and separated children - UASC) 

 

The majority of the children who have fled from Syria to Jordan have come with family 
members. Unaccompanied and separated children identified through UNHCR registration 
comprise 0.5% of the population. However, it is anticipated that the actual number is 
around 2% based on other on-going population assessments5. 

5 REACH- Household Survey UNHCR/UNICEF 

 

 

Almost half of the unaccompanied and separated children have come with their extended 
families (separated) and the remaining half have come with unrelated adults or alone 
(unaccompanied). In Za’atari, 342 unaccompanied children and 307 separated children are 
registered with UNHCR. Sixty-eight (68) % of children arriving without any adult care are 
aged between 15-17 years and 89% are male. 

 

For many children who have been identified as separated from their parents or previous 
primary caregiver, the separation was voluntary, being for protection, survival or economic 
reasons, or for the purpose of family reunification with relatives in Jordan. This heightens 
the need for rigorous verification systems of family links prior to family reunification to 
guard against potential abuse and exploitation of this vulnerable group. Additionally, this is 
important in order to provide targeted support services and prevent secondary separations 
(that can be caused if interventions only target unaccompanied and separated children). 

 

According to the desk review, there are reportedly some children who are travelling alone 
but join unrelated families when crossing the border in order to enter more easily. This may 
prevent these children from being registered as unaccompanied and therefore may prevent 
essential child protection services from being provided, which can determine whether this 
spontaneous foster care is safe and conducive to their well-being and development, and 
prevent risk of exposure to abuse and exploitation. However, these relationships could also 
be a sustainable and positive care arrangement and should therefore not be undermined 
before an assessment has been made. 

 

While UASC are being documented in the camps, over 60% are then leaving the camps, 
either through the bail-out process or simply by absconding. Once children have left the 
camp it is challenging to identify them in the host communities unless contact details are 
documented at the point of UNHCR registration or when identified by partners. 

 


Since the provision of targeted support to unaccompanied children started, UNICEF and 
UNHCR partners have found that a number of children are not unaccompanied but rather 
children sent by their caregivers in the hope of receiving additional rations and NFIs 
(secondary separation). To prevent secondary separations, support services provided to 
unaccompanied and separated children should be equitable to those provided to the wider 
population where possible. 

 

In Za’atari IRC runs a transit centre for segregated overnight care for UASC upon arrival. 
There is, so far, no alternative care system in place in the camp and it is challenging to 
identify foster families for unaccompanied children, particularly as the majority of the 
unaccompanied children are adolescent boys who would traditionally not be welcomed into 
the family home if there are females present. Therefore, the establishment of systems and 
services for supported independent living in the community are a priority. Alternative care 
options are under discussion with Jordanian authorities and relevant organizations. 

 

The majority of KI respondents (88%) 
believed there were children in the camp 
living with families that were not directly 
related to them (unaccompanied). For 
those believed to be unaccompanied, KI 
respondents reported that the community 
primarily supports these children by taking 
them to a camp agency/NGO that works 
with children. Other responses to 
community support are recorded in Figure 
10. 

 

Generally, these behaviours indicate protective mechanisms for unaccompanied children, 
an awareness of services within the camp to assist them and, in the absence of services, 
community structures that are still conducive to providing basic care for the child. 

 

4. Children Associated with Armed Forces and Armed Groups (CAFAAG) 

 

4.1. Children associated with armed forces and groups in Syria 

 

A report from the UN Secretary-General to the Security Council on June 11, 20126, on 
children and armed conflict highlights violations against children by Syrian Armed Forces, 
intelligence forces, and pro-government militias. The violations include targeted killings, 
torture of children in detention (including sexual violence)7 the use of children as human 
shields, and attacks on schools and their use for military operations. The report also cites 
credible allegations that armed opposition groups, including the Free Syrian Army (FSA), are 
recruiting children as soldiers. 

6 http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/06/11/syria-stop-grave-abuses-children 

7 http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/06/15/syria-sexual-assault-detention 

 

 


Ten (37%) KIs had not heard of children residing in the camp who worked for or were being 
used by armed forces or groups in Syria. Eight (30%) KIs shared that they did not know, 
while seven (26%) reported hearing about children living in the camp who had been working 
for an armed group in Syria. For those who had heard of these children, two respondents 
claimed to know between 11 and 20 such children, while one respondent shared knowing 
1-5, one 21-50, and one 50 or more children currently living in the camp who used to be 
part of armed groups. 

 

In male FGDs, boys and men shared that many children had joined armed groups in Syria. 
They also shared that “most” of the armed groups are comprised of adolescent boys 
between the ages of 15-18. Given that such a high proportion were actively engaged in the 
conflict, FGD interviewees said it is inevitable that many of under 18 males that currently 
are living in the camp have been part of armed groups in Syria in the past. Female FGDs also 
revealed similar information. Women and girls shared that many of them had brothers and 
cousins who had been involved with armed groups and were now living in the camp. They 
also pointed out that there were many unaccompanied male youth in the camp, some as 
young as 12 years old, who ran away from the armed groups in Syria. There was no mention 
of children working for or used by the Syrian forces. 

 

Examining the Syrian social viewpoint, male adolescents between the ages of 16-18 are 
considered “men” and take on adult roles of income-generation and familial responsibilities. 
Hence, this adult role is extended at a time of conflict to include fighting for their country. 
While most of these are believed to be male children, girls and women in FGD sessions said 
they too had participated by cooking for the armed groups, particularly when soldiers had 
come to their houses. 

 

4.2. Children Returning to Syria to Join Armed Forces or Armed Groups 

 

Seven respondents (26%) answered affirmatively when asked if they had heard of children 
returning to Syria to join armed groups. Two respondents each said they knew 6 – 10 and 21 
– 50 children who had returned back to Syria to fight, another two respondents claiming to 
know over 50 children who have done the same. One other respondent had heard of 11 – 
20 children who had returned to Syria to join an armed group. Most respondents said they 
knew this through word-of-mouth, followed by their personal observation of children in the 
camp. FGDs also confirmed cases of male adolescents coming to the camp for medical 
treatment and returning to Syria after their physical recovery to continue fighting. Female 
FGDs also shared cases of boys and men who have returned to Syria, as well as mothers and 
fathers who would like to move back to Syria to support sons or fathers who are involved 
with armed groups. 

 

The KI respondents and FGD interviewees believed that most of the boys who returned to 
Syria to join armed groups did so of their own choice. A smaller minority believed that peer 
pressure and pressure from family and relatives could be contributing factors. It can be 
supposed that some of these male returnees are unaccompanied male children and making 
decisions for themselves. This decision-making authority also stands for adolescent boys 
who are considered “adults.” In such cases, they are given the autonomy to decide if they 
wish to stay in the camp or return to Syria. 


 

 

5. GBV and other forms of violence in the camp 

 

Considering the sensitive nature of GBV topics, the KI questionnaire was prepared to ensure 
cultural appropriateness. Practically, this means that questions related to GBV were 
imbedded into other topics and asked using culturally accepted terminologies and 
approaches and starting with less sensitive questions and topics. The following paragraphs 
explore issues of violence in Za’atari camp, including GBV. First an overview of the most 
prevalent forms of violence in the camp is provided, followed by an in-depth analysis of 
domestic violence, a focused section on sexual violence, to conclude with a segment on 
early marriage. Issues related to other forms of exploitation and access to services, which at 
times are defined as GBV, are dealt in the initial paragraphs. 

 

A number of organizations in the camp are actively working with the community to prevent 
and respond to all forms of violence in the camp. For example, SCJ (Save the Children 
Jordan) is responsible for handling cases of violence occurring in schools. Specialized 
activities for youth with behavioural issues are also available, while a range of informal and 
non-formal education activities for male and female youth are also conducted. More 
specifically on GBV, IMC provides case management for child survivors while IFH/UNFPA 
provides case management for adult survivors. UNHCR provides case management and 
referral services to the FPD (Family Protection Department) for serious cases which cannot 
be handled within the camp. Currently, there are no community-based safe houses within 
the camp, but for serious protection concerns survivors can be transferred to Dar al Wafaq 
shelter in Amman through UNHCR and FPD. There are two women’s spaces, while another 
one will open in February. The centres offer recreational, awareness raising and counselling 
activities mainly for women and young women, and at different times of the day for men 
with a view to prevent and respond to GBV. 

 

KI were asked to identify the three most prevalent forms of violence in the camp. Overall, 45 
responses were provided in this regard. Twenty-one (39%) identified domestic violence as 
the most prevailing form of violence in the camp; followed by 16 (30%) stating civil violence; 
nine (17%) criminal violence and lastly eight (15%) gang violence. A majority of KIs identified 
females to be most affected by domestic violence, particularly between the ages of 12 to 18. 
Civil violence was reported far more prevalent among both adolescent boys and young men. 
Similarly, criminal acts were also mentioned as affecting young men between the ages of 18 
to 25. Male and female FGDs reinforced some of these opinions, such as male adults and 
adolescents being affected and participating in civil violence. FGDs also noted peer violence 
is common amongst adolescents, particularly in adolescent boys. 

 

While KIs reported home (tent) as the location where most violence occurs (as it correlates 
to the highest form of violence being domestic violence), other locations where the risk of 
violence is perceived to be the highest are discussed below according to gender and age. 

 


Women and girls repeatedly 
claimed during FGDs and the 
Safety Audit that the home 
(tent) is considered unsafe. 
They feel this because they 
are unable to lock themselves 
inside when alone. They also 
lack privacy, especially when 
changing clothes since they 
must first turn off the lights in 
the evening before changing. 
Overcrowding due to several 
family members living in the 
same small space, including 
males, also hinders their 
privacy. For girls, 
latrine/shower facilities were 
considered significantly 
unsafe spaces. 

 

This was also highlighted in 
the Safety Audit with the 
sense of insecurity primarily 
related to lack of lighting in 
some areas of the camp and 
broken locks in latrines and 
showers. While this is 
problematic during the day, it is of serious concern during the night. Girls and women stated 
that they generally refrain from using toilets after 7 pm. 

 

Girls and women tend to go in pairs or in groups to latrines, relying on safety in numbers. 
Also connected to latrines and showers is the general lack of lighting after dusk in the camp, 
restricting access to latrine facilities at night. This was also true of lack of lighting on the way 
to the latrine facilities and at water collection points. 

 

Communal spaces were also recognized as vulnerable areas, and kitchens were seen to be 
particularly unsafe. A Safety Audit interviewee shared that she felt unsafe because of men 
who stood outside the kitchen and the lack of lighting within the kitchens. An FGD 
interviewee also expressed that single men entered the family communal kitchen 
specifically to harass women. The perceived feeling of insecurity in communal kitchens has 
led to some women preferring to cook on portable gas stoves outside their tents. This 
exacerbates existing concerns about fires caused by cooking near tents leading to loss of life 
or serious bodily harm and destroyed tents. The Safety Audit highlighted that in certain 
areas of the camp the community has agreed on forbidding boys older than nine years old 
to access the kitchen, allowing women and girls to carry out chores in a protected 
environment. 

 


Boys were thought to be at most risk of violence by KIs when on the way to school, at the 
main camp gates and while they were around the camp’s periphery. Playing areas were also 
identified as a potential location for violence among boys and the Safety Audit also 
extended this risk to girls in playing areas because of the lack of adult supervision and the 
presence of older boys. 

 

Men were also believed to experience violence at the camp gates and KI respondents 
thought both men and women were at risk of violence at food and NFI distribution points. 
The FGDs and safety audit strongly supported this claim as one of the main points where 
there are on-going violent outbreaks, mainly due to overcrowding. For this reason, men 
usually take on the task of waiting in line during food and NFI distributions but women, 
particularly from female headed households, do access these services and face similar risks. 

 

Related to issues of violence, the Safety Audit examined security measures in place for the 
prevention of violence. The interviewees provided mixed opinions on this issue. Some 
community members said there were no formal community patrol systems but that 
everyone took collective responsibility to stay alert and address security issues as they came 
up. There was also a sense that security forces are stationed only outside the camp, while 
there is no security available inside the camp. From the Safety Audit, it is clear that a greater 
involvement of the community in patrols and related activities is necessary. 

 

5.2. Domestic Violence 

 

The desk review contributed to this issue with reference to a report released by The Syrian 
Commission for Family Affairs (SCFA) and UNICEF 2009 on the Situation Analysis of Children 
(SITAN) that noted despite corporal punishment being prohibited, children were subject to 
violence at home and in school. The report stated that males both experience and practice 
violence more frequently than females and that the level of violence was worse in rural 
Syria. Furthermore the Multi Indicators Cluster Survey (MICS) in 2005-2006 reported 87% of 
Syrian children between 2- 14 years having experienced violent discipline (physical 
punishment and/or psychological aggression), with no significant difference between girls 
and boys. These reports lend an understanding that domestic violence existed before the 
crisis and that countering such actions within the camp will require a gradual process of 
community education and guidance, addressed within a larger framework of violence 
prevention. 

 

Twenty KI (74%) believed that domestic violence occurs in the camp; while four (15%) 
shared that it does not and the remaining three (11%) did not know. Seven (35%) responses 
identified that the majority of families experience domestic violence but another nine (45%) 
responses stated a minority of families do. 

 

Domestic violence predominantly takes place within the tents. The immediate concern 
about in-home violence is the danger of these acts going unnoticed, unheard and the 
secrecy that reinforces perpetrator’s sense of power and control over the victim. Domestic 
violence also goes largely unreported as community attitudes, particularly in strong, 
patriarchal societies, maintain that the realm of the home is private and actions in the home 


are not to be held for public judgment. Hence, this knowledge is important in designing 
interventions that rely on community-based mechanisms and dialogue to address domestic 
violence. 

 

Eighteen (67%) KIs stated that women are more affected by domestic violence then men, 
while 12 (44%) stated that girls are more affected than boys by domestic violence. However, 
FGDs highlighted that boys and young men were also strongly affected by domestic 
violence. 

 

Fifteen (38%) KIs mentioned 
male spouses and 11 (28%) 
stated male 
parents/caregivers as the 
main perpetrators of 
domestic violence. 
Furthermore, three (8%) KIs 
each mentioned female 
parent/caregiver, other 
adult male family members 
and other adult female 
family members as 
perpetrators of domestic 
violence. The FGD sessions 
verified that perpetrators were usually males such as fathers, husbands and older brothers. 
In a FGD conducted with young women between the ages of 18-24 years, mothers-in-law 
were also identified as perpetrators of domestic violence. 

 

Given the high frequency of adult women believed to be affected by domestic violence, and 
the corresponding belief that male spouses are the main perpetrators, there is a strong 
likelihood of intimate partner violence taking place in the camp. This type of violence is 
complex as it is fuelled by cultural beliefs and deeply-rooted gender norms that are 
exacerbated in crisis settings. For example, the desk review shared that Syrian women who 
participated in an inter-agency rapid assessment in 20128 disclosed that their husbands 
were under immense stress, and they anticipate this to lead to heightened levels of 
domestic violence. It was observed in this report that women generally accepted this 
eventuality, and in certain instances, believed the abusive behaviour was justified given 
their dire circumstances. FGDs confirmed that one of the main justifications given for this 
violence was stress caused by lack of money and employment. FGDs with adult women 
reported that there will be a reduction in violence as men find jobs. 

8 Inter-agency assessment, July 201 

 

 

KI respondents thought that girls and women survivors often turn to family, friends and 
teachers for help, with a small percentage seeking help from religious leaders and NGOs. 
They felt the same pattern is true for boys, with some also seeking medical assistance in 
clinics. Meanwhile men were also primarily believed to reach out to family members, 
followed by friends, NGOs, religious leaders and even clinics. A point of deliberation here is 


perceptions versus reality of family and friends as support persons. As mentioned above, 
family privacy is a valued cultural norm and is 
especially so when related to matters of family 
honour. It is less likely that domestic violence 
incidents are shared outside the family and if 
shared, it is unknown whether the confidante 
would seek services for the survivor from outside 
the family. However, FDGs with women and girls 
also referred to protection organizations as a way 
of dealing with violence. 

 

Furthermore, though the interagency case management report, protection organizations in 
the camp confirm that a number of survivors of domestic violence are willing to access 
protection services and psychosocial support. 

“The young women can come here 
(protection agency) … and the 
psychologist here can help her.” 

 

A FGD sessions with adolescent girls 
highlighted how they can access support 

 

 

5.2. Sexual Violence 

 

Out of the 27 respondents, 15 (56%) reported to have not heard of sexual violence incidents 
in the camps while the remaining 12 (44%) had heard of cases. Eight respondents claimed 
they had heard of 1-2 incidences of sexual violence while three stated 2-5 cases. It is worth 
mentioning that FGD with adolescent girls and women clearly highlight that community 
members are very often aware of the same high profile cases that occurred in the camp. 

 

The figure to the left illustrates KI 
responses on the most common areas 
where sexual violence is perceived to 
occur. 

 

With regards to sexual violence, 
communal areas are deemed slightly 
riskier than homes. Associated with 
communal areas are paths leading to 
latrines/showers that are similarly 
believed to be high-risk areas. In addition 
to poor lighting and lack of security, the 
potential perpetrators at these locations may be contributing factors to insecurity in these 
communal areas. Another observation is the small but significant presumption that playing 
around the camp is considered unsafe and increases the risk of sexual violence. In using the 
word “playing,” the connection is to children and the belief that such a normal activity is 
perceived as unsafe by parents. This demonstrates that parents are not confident about 
adequate security and supervision at these sites which leads to children, especially girls, 
being restricted access to playgrounds and friends. 

 

Women are thought to be the main survivors of sexual violence. With regard to children, KI 
respondents felt that girls were three times more likely to be targeted for sexual violence 
than boys. The threat to boys, though smaller, nevertheless exists. 


When asked about perpetrators of sexual violence, 11 KI asserted that community members 
were more likely to be perpetrators in comparison to five respondents who identified family 
members. The rest of KI either did not know or did not provide an answer. None of the KI 
respondents, Safety Audit and FGD interviewees mentioned the police, security guards, 
teachers and aid workers as perpetrators of sexual exploitation and abuse. 

“There was an old man who wanted to 
rape a married girl, 17 or 20 years 
old. She screamed before anything 
happen(ed), everyone came and her 
husband injured the man. The police 
arrested both (the old man and the 
husband). People said she exposed 
herself into a scandal because she 
reported.” 

 

A FGD participant highlights community 
attitudes toward reporting violence 

 

 

It is worth considering that sexual violence committed by an outsider is more likely to get 
the community’s attention as compared to sexual violence within the home. As there is very 
limited pre-conflict information from Syria on patterns of sexual violence within the home, it 
is challenging to know the trends and beliefs on this topic. 

 

Women, girls and boys are largely believed to turn to a family member to seek support for 
sexual violence. Out of 15 responses for girls survivors, eight (53%) mentioned family 
members followed by three (20%) responses stated NGOs. Similarly, from the 17 responses 
regarding women survivors, five (29%) mentioned family members while three (18%) 
responses stated NGOs. 

 

The desk review briefly examined the phenomenon 
of honor killings that are believed to be a 
widespread practice in Syria though this 
phenomenon remains largely undocumented. A 
final report shared by the Interagency GBV Advisor 
in June 2012 recommended that male attitudes 
towards women living in compromised conditions 
be explored as they may increase the risk of 
exposure to circumstances that may be “morally 
damaging to the family.” 

 

With regard to male survivors, from the total 15 
responses, four (27%) mentioned that men would not seek support and two (13%) believed 
they were likely to turn to a friend, NGO or religious leader. The refusal to seek support 
reiterates the global culture of silence that permeates and exacerbates male violence and is 
particularly evident among boys and men living in conflict and displacement. The desk 
review highlighted that since the conflict, reports have been published on sexual violence 
being used as a form of torture against men and boys9. While sexual violence against boys 
and men may be perceived to a lesser degree within the camp setting, it is important to 
recognize the specific needs and challenges of male survivors. 

9 http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/06/15/syria-sexual-assault-detention 

 

 

A promising finding in the KI interviews was that for cases of sexual violence within the 
camp, women, men and girls would seek out the police and NGO services. Knowledge of 
health facilities for sexual violence survivors were also shared in the Safety Audit. 

 

 

 

 


5.3. Early Marriage and other Marriage Practices 

 

Service providers in the camp have been aware of the issue of early marriage since the 
onset of the emergency, as marriage under the age of 18 is a culturally accepted practice 
among the Syrian community. The 2009 UNICEF Situation Analysis of Children in Syria 
(SITAN) noted that 13% of women between the age of 20 and 24 had married before the 
age of 18 in Syria. Marriage under the age of 18 in Jordan is illegal, however under certain 
conditions it can be approved by a court. When marriage takes place under 18 years of age, 
often through a Sheikh and not verified in court, UNHCR counsels the child and the family 
on the marriage law in Jordan as well as its legal and social consequences. When cases of 
children at risk of early marriage are referred, UNHCR closely coordinates with relevant 
authorities and actors to prevent the marriage. Furthermore to prevent early marriage, 
IFH/UNFPA provides girls and their families’ information and guidance about the social and 
health issues related to early marriage and pregnancies. Reproductive health and family 
planning services are also available in the camp though JHAS/UNFPA and GSF (Gynécologie 
Sans Frontières). 

 

Traditional marriage customs including early marriage were highlighted by the KI and 
reiterated in FGD sessions. The majority of the KI believed that the socially acceptable age 
for marriage for girls within the Syrian community is 15-18 years. This is generally regarded 
as the accepted age range for marriage in Syria and therefore it is not necessarily considered 
as early marriage. In FGDs, males including adolescent boys confirmed that the age 
considered normal for marriage for a girl ranged from 13 years and above. Both KI and FGD 
interviewees affirmed boys were married mainly between the ages of 18-25 years. It was 
raised in a FGD session that boys were generally engaged after their military service, which 
is usually when they are 18 years old. 

 

An interesting point noted was that both males 
and females believed the age of marriage, 
particularly for girls, is now being delayed due to 
the conflict and resulting displacement. In FGD 
discussions, when the age of marriage question 
was posed to females and males, their answers 
were separated by two distinct categories, “age 
of marriage in Syria” and “age of marriage in the 
camp”. 

“When we were in Syria, 15 was 
accepted for a girl to get married and 
if she is 18 and not married yet, people 
will start talking badly about her, but 
now in the camp after 20 is a good 
age.” 

 

A FGD participant highlights changing 
community attitudes toward age of 
marriage 

 

 

The prevailing uncertainty, lack of negotiation 
and prestige lost due to lack of jobs and wealth 
were mentioned as some reasons for delaying 
girls’ marriages as well as the unstable 
environment not being conducive for the start of 
long-term relationships. 

“We know a lot of engaged people who 
broke up after they came to the camp. 
They say it is not the right 
environment to get married in…” 

 
A FGD participant highlights changing 
community attitudes toward age of marriage 

 

 

Sixteen (59%) KI respondents did not know of any 
girl under the age of 18 who was married or was 


planning to marry since after arrived in Za’atari Camp. Five (19%) respondents said they 
personally knew of 1-2 girls while another five (19%) said they knew of 2-5 girls all under the 
ages of eighteen who were either married or planning to get married in the camp. In 
contrast, 22 (81%) respondents said they did not know of any boy under the age of 18 who 
was married or was planning to get married while two (7%) respondents each felt they 
knew 1-2 boys and 2-5 boys who were in some stage of the engagement and marriage 
process. 

 

“They think that Syrian girls get 
married for free or for cheap” 

 

“The men refused to get their 
daughters married to outsiders, 
because the groom’s family will 
always look down at her and treat her 
with disrespect.” 

 

FGD participants highlight attitudes of the 
community towards certain marriage 
proposals 

 

However, FGD sessions, particularly with girls and 
women uncovered that girls receive marriage 
proposals from Jordanian men and Jordanian 
mothers who want to marry their sons to Syrian 
girls, most of which are reportedly refused. In fact, 
only two (7%) KI reported knowing of girls who 
were married outside the Syrian community. 
According to FGD, people in the camp also receive 
proposals from men in other countries. However, 
none of the KI personally knew of any boy or girl 
from the camp who got married and then moved to 
another country. 

 

There are awareness sessions on early 
marriage that helps us to educate our 
husbands and kids” 

“We learned now that early marriage 
is negative, because a child can never 
raise a child” 
FGD participants highlight the positive 

In discussions with girls and women, the sentiment 
expressed in refusing proposals did not necessarily 
seem to be related to the age of marriage or the 
unwillingness to consider those proposals. The 
reasons reflected more on matters of pride and 
being disrespected for being refugees. 

 

FGDs with women and girls also highlighted 
specifically the impact of raising awareness 
conducted on the topic of early marriage. In the 
FGDs, some girls also pointed out the difficulties of 
early marriage and why this practice is 
disadvantageous to a girl’s physical and 
psychological development. 

“From 16 – 20 years is the age for a 
young girl to live and it is her right to 
think as a girl.” 

 

“I was married when I was 15 years 
and had two abortions…I was not 
able to think clear and did not know if 
it was my fault. I am 19 now with a 9 
months baby, (I) had a very hard 
delivery….I still feel I am too young to 
be a mother.” 
FGD participants highlight the positive 
affect of raising awareness 

 

 

As the emergency situation continues and the 
burden of economic hardship worsens, these 
threats to early marriage have the potential to 
increase and compromise girls’ rights and quality of 
life. 

 

The KI interviews did not provide any information 
on temporary marriages where at least one partner 
is from the camp. This was due to interviewees 
asserting very limited or no knowledge on this 
potential practice. Very limited information was also uncovered about forced marriages. 


Recommendations immediate and longer term 

 

Improve Security 

Advocate for improvement of security inside the camp to reduce violence and gender-based violence (GBV) 
particularly by: 

 

Responsible sector 

1. Immediate actions 

 

Increase camp lighting in strategic/insecure areas in the camp, in particular around common 
areas as WASH facilities and kitchens 

Camp Management 
/WASH 

Mobilize the community to ensure common spaces in the camp are well maintained, in 
particular when it comes to their safety features, e.g. establish WASH committees 

Camp Management 
/WASH 

Continue to liaise with actors involved in registration and camp management to ensure that 
vulnerable households and children at risks are placed closer to services in the camp 

Camp Management 

Continue to advocate for controlled access to camp 

Camp Management 

2. Medium and long term actions 

 

Continue to liaise with actors involved in camp management and provide inputs for site 
planning and camp management and ensure children, youths and women are consulted, in 
particular vulnerable groups as female headed households, unaccompanied children, children 
and adults with disabilities and elderly people 

Camp Management 

Increase Jordanian police capacity and enhance patrolling, also inside the camp, and work to 
build trust between police and refugee/host community 

Camp Management 

Advocate with law enforcement agency to increase their presence and ensure that individuals 
in the camp are held responsible when breaking the law 

Camp Management 

Conduct regular Safety Audits 

CP&GBV 



 

Promote self-protection through community based networks 

Engage communities to develop effective and representative protective structures, particularly to address domestic 
and sexual violence, by: 

Responsible sector 

1. Immediate actions 

 

Strengthen and formalize refugee community-based security committees to promote self-
protection 

Camp Management 

Ensure linkages between community-based security committees and relevant community 
based protection structures, as well as the links to camp management and the police 

Camp Management 

Ensure gender balance within community-based security committees and, particularly, in the 
security leadership structures 

Camp Management 

Engaging inter-agency collaboration on developing and strengthening community security 
activities 

Camp Management 

2. Medium and long term actions 

 

Continue to empower existing child/youth and women’s forums to identify and raise security 
concerns with camp management and security agencies 

CP&GBV 

Support parents and other care givers ability to re-establish their capacity for good parenting 
as to better understand and support their children 

CP&GBV 

Strengthen peer to peer support (among both children and adults) as a way of involving 
individuals in supporting each other and build up their skills 

CP&GBV 

Empower key community members to support survivors of violence though provisions of 
information and referral 

Health/Protection/ 

CP&GBV 

Promote and strengthen safe behaviours among camp residents, particularly women and girls 

Protection/CP&GBV 



 

 

 

 


 

Address violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation 

Prevent and respond to violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation by: 

 

Responsible sector 

1. Immediate actions 

 

Ensure that distributions(e.g. food, NFIs) happen in a transparent manner and do not put 
individuals at risk of experiencing violence 

Camp 
Management/NFI/Food/Shelter 

Enhance identification, monitoring and follow-up of children at imminent risk of abuse, neglect, 
violence and exploitation by their parents or caretakers and ensure inclusion in the Best 
Interests Assessment/Best Interest Determination process 

CP&GBV 

Continue to improve case management and a multispectral approach for survivors of GBV and 
other protection concerns 

CP&GBV 

Ensure children engaged in child labour and their families/caregivers receive targeted 
assistance and support 

CP&GBV 

Continue to strengthen coordination between the protection and health sectors, and ensure 
that all health providers are trained on Case Management Referral, Psycho social First Aid, and 
protection referral pathway 

Health/ CP&GBV 

Continue to provide Code of Conduct trainings and ensure all volunteers and staff of agencies 
working in the camp have been trained and signed Code of Conduct 

All sectors 

Continue to provide PSEA (Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse) training for all involved 
volunteers, staff and agencies in collaboration with GBV actors 

All sectors 

Monitoring and advocacy for the establishment of clear and transparent procedures of bail-out 
system from the camp 

Camp Management 

Inform camp population on risks of exploitation and abuse connected to the bail-out system 

Camp Management/ 

Protection 

2. Medium and long term actions 

 

Ensure that separate distribution lines are always available for males and females 

Camp 
Management/NFI 

/Food 

Decrease crowding at distribution points, by increasing the number of distribution points 

Camp 
Management/NFI 

/Food 

Continue to improve case management for survivors of GBV and other protection concerns, 
including Best Interests Assessments for children at heightened risk and ensure appropriate 
response 

Health/Protection/ 

CP&GBV 

Support training of teachers on child rights and child protection as well as on appropriate 
methods of teaching and the need to treat all children equally and with respect 

CP&GBV/Education 

Engage education actors in strengthening of the PTAs (Parent-Teacher Associations) to address 
cultural obstacles to schooling (e.g. lack of parent support, discrimination, child labor, early 
marriage) 

CP&GBV/Education 

Promote and develop accelerated learning programs for children who have not attended or 
have fallen behind in school 

Education 

Advocate to ensure humanitarian actors are allowed to monitor the bail-out system 

Camp Management 



Address habitual acceptance of violence and harmful practices, including early 
marriage 

Address the habits of day to day violence, and particularly domestic violence by: 

 

Responsible sector 

1. Immediate actions 

 

Sensitize the community on the detrimental impact of domestic violence and raise awareness 
on alternative disciplining and mediation mechanisms 

CP&GBV/Protection 

Continue to provide awareness raising on issues relating to early marriage in particular on 
current laws, health, and social consequences, including though peer-to-peer education and the 

Health/Protection/ 

CP&GBV 




involvement of community/religious leaders 

Continue to provide reproductive health services and counselling to child brides and girl 
mothers 

Health/Protection/ 

CP&GBV 

2. Medium and long term actions 

 

Involve boys and men to prevent and address habitual acceptance of violence and harmful 
practices within their communities, particularly through the promotion of positive male role 
models 

Health/Protection/ 

CP&GBV 

Engage men and boys in different social and stress management activities to prevent violence 

Health/Protection/ 

CP&GBV 

Increase focussed support for child brides and girl mothers though specialised support 
mechanisms and by integrating them in existing programs 

Health/CP&GBV 



 

Improve care and protection for unaccompanied and separated children (UASC) 

Address the needs for special care and protection of unaccompanied and separated children by: 

 

Responsible 
sector 

1. Immediate actions 

 

Continue systematic identification of UASC through UNHCR Registration and reception 
processes, as well as active case finding in the community through awareness-raising 

CP&GBV 

Ensure all actors responsible for case management for UASC are using standardised tools for 
documentation, assessment, family tracing, verification of family links and reunification and 
sharing information to ensure ‘children on the move’ are appropriately supported 

CP&GBV 

Conduct and document verification of family links for all unaccompanied and separated children 
and coordinate this closely and rigorously with the government bail-out system 

 

CP&GBV 

2. Medium and long term actions 

 

Work closely with community-based organisations and structures to ensure the high numbers of 
UASC are provided with a level of monitoring and follow-up 

CP&GBV 

Provide interim care to unaccompanied children in accordance with inter-agency emergency 
guidelines and localised SOPs; work with the government to formalise longer-term care 
arrangements as appropriate 

CP&GBV 

Ensure any children in need of tracing are referred to the ICRC and the initial tracing request 
interview is jointly conducted with ICRC and the case management agency staff to prevent errors 
in documentation and to enable greater follow-up 

CP&GBV 

Establish a Regional UASC Taskforce to exchange information on patterns of family separation, 
tracing mechanisms and alternative care and to share tools and best practices in the region 

CP&GBV 

Strengthen and expand the BID (Best Interests Determination) panel and build capacity of case 
workers from each agency to ensure all UASC and children at heightened risk requiring a BID 
benefit from one 

CP&GBV 



 

Prevent recruitment and use of children by armed forces and armed groups (CAFAAG) 

Mitigate the risk of children being recruited and used by armed groups or armed forces by: 

 

Responsible 
sector 

1. Immediate actions 

 

Provide sustainable solutions (including counselling, vocational training, ensuring formal and 
non-formal education) for boys and girls at risk of recruitment or use of boys and girls by armed 
forces or armed groups back in Syria 

CP&GBV 

Conduct sensitation/awareness raising activities to youths, parents and other community 
members on children rights, including CAFAAG 

CP&GBV 

2. Medium and long term actions 

 

Monitor and report on possible recruitment or use of girls and boys by armed forces or armed 
groups 

CP&GBV 



 


Facilitate inclusion of children and adults with disabilities 

Facilitate inclusion of children and adults with disabilities in educational and recreational activities and 
other services by: 

Responsible 
sector 

1. Immediate actions 

 

Strengthen coordination agencies providing services for children and adults with disabilities 
ensuring provision of assistance tools, rehabilitative services and physical rehabilitation 

Health/MHPSS 

Engage with members of the Education Working Group to advocate for improved access to 
schools for all children (e.g. ramps, special desks, appropriate toilet facilities) 

 

CP&GBV/Education 

2. Medium and long term actions 

 

Strengthen inclusion of children with disabilities and other children at risk within the child 
friendly spaces, e.g. by designating particular times of the day with increased support, 
supervision and guidance 

CP&GBV/Education 

Sensitize community leaders, teachers, students, parents and caregivers on diversity and the 
importance of treating children with disabilities with dignity and respect and the impacts of 
abuse, neglect, violence and exploitation on girls and boys 

CP&GBV 



 

Expand information and increase access to services 

Expand information and increase access to services to the refugee population by: 

 

Responsible 
sector 

1. Immediate actions 

 

Develop and widely distribute key Child Protection (CP) and Gender-based Violence (GBV) 
messages, including through formats appropriate for children 

CP&GBV 

Disseminate Information Education Communication (IEC) materials in schools, health centres 
and other key places in the camps 

CP&GBV 

Promote community-based systems to ensure women and girls particularly are able to access 
services safely and comfortably 

CP&GBV/Camp 
Management 

Increase participation of community members, particularly women and girls, in shaping available 
services 

CP&GBV 

Ensure that female personnel are available throughout service provision in the camp, including 
though promotion of quota systems 

All sectors 

Continue to improve inter-agency referral across sectors 

CP&GBV 

2. Medium and long term actions 

 

Advocate for the creation and implementation of a camp-wide information and dissemination 
system 

Camp Management 

Ensuring information to in particular newly arrived women, girls, boys and men on available 
support mechanisms 

Camp 
Management/ 
CP&GBV 

Strengthen information on available services in the camp particularly protection and Mental 
Health Psychosocial Support (MHPSS) services 

Camp 
Management/ 
CP&GBV/MHPSS 



 

 

 

 

 


Conclusion 

These findings and recommendations should guide the way forward for all partners working 
in the field of child protection and gender-based violence as well as other relevant sectors in 
Za’atri camp. This report will inform the work of the Child Protection and Gender-Based 
Violence sub-Working Group and development of the group’s 2013 strategy to address 
short and long term issues and strengthen existing services for girls, boys, women and men 
in the camp, ensuring linkages to national systems. The key findings in this report should 
inform child protection and gender-based violence programming when establishing new 
camps for refugees in Jordan. 

 

In addition, the Child Protection and Gender-Based Violence National SOP for the 
emergency will be a helpful tool to ensure referral pathways are effective, and to prevent 
and respond to protection concerns for the people of concern. 

 

Acknowledgements 

Our gratitude is extended to the respondents in Za’atari who gave their time and provided 
information for this assessment. 

 

February 2013, Jordan 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


C:\Users\amalhas\Desktop\UNICEF_logo_Cyan.png
C:\Users\amalhas\Desktop\UNWomen.jpg
C:\Users\amalhas\Desktop\UPP logo.jpg
C:\Users\amalhas\Desktop\UNHCR.jpg
C:\Users\amalhas\Desktop\IR.jpg
C:\Users\amalhas\Desktop\STC.jpg
C:\Users\Margherita\Desktop\UNFPA-LOGO-English.png 


The Child Protection and Gender-based Violence in Emergencies Sub-Working Group`s 
objective is to coordinate prevention and response to Child Protection and Gender-based 
Violence against children and adults affected by the crisis living in camps, sites and host 
communities. The Child Protection and Gender-based Violence in Emergencies Sub-
Working Group was established in February 2012, it is co-chaired by UNICEF, UNFPA and 
supported by NHF/IFH and is a sub-working group of the Community based Protection 
Working Group chaired by UNHCR. Members of the Sub-Working Group involve UN 
agencies, international and national NGOs working in these sectors. 

 

 

 

 

 


