 

 

Field visit to Jordan and Lebanon 
to assess Humanitarian situation 
as a result of conflict in Syria 


 

 

 

Mission Report 

 (February 2012) 

 

 

 

For more information, please contact: 

 

Moustafa Osman 

Head of Humanitarian Department 

Moustafa.osman@irworldwide.org 

 

 


Photo caption: Syrian refugee receiving food aid from Islamic Relief Lebanon (Wadi Khaled area, North Lebanon) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

J:\lebanon IRUSA video\syrians refugees\best Pics\Disdtribution\DSC05068.JPG
\\FILESERVER\Users$\mohammed.afsar\My Documents\My Pictures\logo\transparent_logo_only.png

The Humanitarian situation relating to the Syrian Refugees in both Jordan and 
Lebanon is as confusing and ambiguous as the political situation in Syria. Most of the 
information obtained about the Syrian refugees in the region is based on speculation 
and guesses, the same regarding plans and future possible scenarios of future 
humanitarian response. This is due to the sensitivity of the political situation in both 
countries relating to Syria and the uncertainty over how the situation in Syria is likely 
to develop. 

Map of Syria 


Map of Syria 

 

 

 

 

Purpose of field visit: 

1. To assess the current humanitarian situation with regards Syrian refugees and 
to develop an appropriate response 
2. To enhance the capacity of the field team to design short-term and possible 
medium term intervention 
3. To meet with various stakeholders along with the country team to gather 
information and to highlight IRW's possible role. 


 

Situation in Jordan 

. The situation regarding the number of refugees in Jordan is fairly ambiguous. 
The figures vary from one organisation to another therefore it is difficult to 



obtain an accurate picture of the humanitarian situation in Jordan. 3,500 
Syrians have registered with UNHCR as refugees. However, it is estimated 
that the true figure may be up to 10,000. The larger figure is used by UNHCR 
for planning purposes. Most refugees are large families, relatively poor and 
less educated. It is estimated that 60% of the refugees are illiterate and 40% 
of the children have not been vaccinated. 


 

The status of Syrian refugees is ambiguous as only Palestinian refugees are 
officially recognised as ‘refugees’ in Jordan. Furthermore, there may also be 
economic and medical assistance migrants entering Jordan. This will place 
additional pressure on the capacity of Jordan to cope with the new arrivals. 

 

. The Government of Jordan operates an ‘open door’ policy towards the 
arrivals from Syria. Jordan is not a signatory to the 1951 Convention relating 
to the Status of Refugees but has signed an MOU with UNHCR in 1997, under 
this MOU, if UNHCR recognises someone as a refugee; UNHCR will be allowed 
6 months to settle them. In the case of Syrian Refugees, UNHCR issues them 
with ‘Asylum Seeker’ cards. In addition to Syrian refuges, there is a strong 
possibility that Iraqi refugees currently living in Syria may also decide to enter 
Jordan. However they do not recognise them as refugees but as welcome 
them as guest or brothers. 


Syrian refugees can access medical assistance but they need to pay for it. This 
is in comparison with Iraqi refugees that can access medical assistance at the 
same rate as ‘uninsured Jordanian citizens’. UNHCR is working with Jordan 
Aid Society in providing healthcare to refugees from Syria. Many of the 
refugees are suffering from complex medical conditions such as chronic 
diseases, renal dialysis and bullet and shrapnel wounds. 

Syrian refugees have the right to access private and public education in 
Jordan but due to lack of space in school, many refugee children are not able 
to access education. Refugee children have already missed a semester of 
their school year. More concerning is that many children are working as their 
parents are sick and unable to work. Children receive an average of 2 JD per 
day (2.8 US$). 

 

. Government of Jordan’s attitude toward INGOs: Government of Jordan is 
reluctant to allow international NGO to get involved in Humanitarian efforts 
directly. They prefer local NGO to take the lead under their control. It is 
challenging for International NGOs to work in Jordan as freedom is restricted 
and there is close monitoring. INGOs not fully registered have to work 
through National semi governmental organisation such as Jordan Hashemite 
Charity Organisation (JHCO), to implement programmes. Humanitarian 
organisation need to work with a local NGO or register with the Ministry of 
Planning in Jordan, Funds for Syrian Refugees need to go through ‘committee 



approval’ process but unlike the previous Iraq refugee process, the current 
process/mechanism is unclear. Having said that, there is a room for 
negotiation and putting pressure on the official department to allow for more 
freedom, especially as they have limited recourses to deal with large scale 
influx. 


Response of international community 

Despite the presence of representative of the International Humanitarian 
community in both countries, they are not ready to cope with large and sudden 
influxes of refugees. 

UNHCR is working closely with Ministry of Interior in Jordan in managing the influx of 
refugees arriving from Syria. The Ministry has provided two guest houses to UNHCR 
in Ramtha and Salt each has capacity of 150 people, the second guest house is a 
detention centre, allocated for army deserters from Syria. 

 

Both of these facilities are furnished by HUHCR and provided with all the essential 
facilities to the residents in the guest houses; the facilities are designed for short 
term usage. The aim is for people to stay for a couple of weeks and then move on. 
UNHCR are looking to increase capacity to 500 people very soon. The UNHCR prefer 
serving refugees in urban setting opposing camp setting due to long term issues 
associated with refugee camps. They welcomed Islamic Relief’s current activity 
(amongst other things) of providing rent subsidies to 550 families from Syrian. 

 

The British Embassy is expecting a DFID consultant to arrive next week to help plan 
for the Syrian refugees. 

 

There are some other organisation also operating in Jordan but in a very small scale 
and ad hoc basis, for example ‘one-off’ distribution, distributing cash without 
coordination...etc. and no regular coordination meeting are held in relation to the 
Syrian refugees. 

 

Response of the National organisation 

Jordan: The bulk of the humanitarian assistant is carried out by local organisations 
with a mainly Islamic background such as Al Katab wa sunnah and Islamic centre in 
Jordan, working under the umbrella of Hashemite Charity Organisation (JHCO) or the 
Jordanian Red Crescent. The Hashemite Charity Organisation (JHCO) is the only 
organisations mandated by the government to work with Syrian Refugees / guests. 

The Government of Jordan with cooperation with JHCO is in preparing 3 camp sites 
near Al Mafraq border with capacity of about 1,000 refugees. 

 

The current operating national NGOs are lack of experiences and management 
capacity, so they need an urgent capacity building and training in order to cope with 
any further demands. 

 

Islamic Relief’s response so far 

Islamic Relief has implemented a USD$500,000 project which involved providing 
house rent assistance to 550 families of Syrian refugees via kitab wa sunnah and 


other local organisations in various parts of Jordan including Ramtha, Maan, Amman 
and Zarqa. We also provide food and non food items to the same number of families 
for a three months period. 9 Containers of medical items (lab tubes, bedpans, 
blankets, hygiene kits, toys, children’s books, children clothing, wheelchairs, etc.) has 
been provided by IRUSA (items donated by Church of Latter Day Saints). These items 
are due to be distributed very soon. 

 

 

Second: situation in LEBANON 

 

. Officially 6500 Syrians refugees have registered with UNHCR. However, 
according to UNHCR’s own representatives 2,000-3,000 people in Bekaa 
Valley and 1,000 in Beirut are not registered. It is feasible that true figure of 
refugees could be as high as 11,000 to 12,000. People don’t want to register 
because of fear for their safety. (Registration is conducted jointly with UNHCR 
and HRC – Lebanon Government’s High Commission for Refugees) They fear 
their names will be passed onto the Syrian authorities. However, this 
situation is unsustainable as refugees (and their hosts) may not be able to 
cope without assistance) UNHCR is currently looking at ways of helping 
refugees who are unwilling to provide their details. 


 

. HRC is working with UNHCR in the north of Lebanon but does not have the 
mandate to work in Bekaa Valley due to political consideration in that area. 
HRC (Government’s High Refugee Commission) has very limited capacity (5 
staff members) and will struggle to cope with the Humanitarian situation. 


 

. The security situation has deteriorated and Lebanese Government has been 
deployed the army in Wadi Khalid (North Lebanon) and there have also been 
some clashes in Tripoli (between rival political parties). The situation in Syria 
is creating instability in Lebanon. As there are divides amongst sectarian lines; 
generally Lebanese Sunni community support the Syrian refugees whilst 
other groups support the Assad regime as a result the refugees prefer to seek 
shelter in Sunni dominated areas in Lebanon. 


 

. According to Save the Children, 358 children have been enrolled in remedial 
classes. However, the security situation has resulted in 40% decrease in 
attendance. There is low enrolment rate of children and a high dropout of 
children due to a number for reasons such as; security situation, differences 
in the curriculum and difficulties of Syrian children integrated in schools. 
Traditionally, Syrian boys drop out of schools at the age of 14-15 ages to 
pursue vocational training. 


 


. Lebanon Government is covering the costs of the wounded and keeping 
borders open. However, they will not enter Bekaa Valley due to the 
sensitivities with Hizb Allah. The government has suggested moving Syrian 
refugees to North Lebanon however, will not prepare any sites yet in order 
not send any overt signals of its intentions. 


 

. HRC (Government’s High Refugee Commission) has very limited capacity (5 
staff members) and will struggle to cope with the Humanitarian situation 


 

. UNHCR, UNICEF and DRC conducted a joint assessment in Bekaa Valley. They 
estimate between 5,000-6,000 Syrian families in Bekaa Valley. People are 
arriving mainly from HOMS. Many are accommodated amongst host families 
(in mainly Sunni areas in Bekaa family). The local authority and local 
community are trying to meet the needs of the refugees. Children are not 
attending schools. There is an urgent need for winterisation items 


 

. It is unlikely that there will be a massive influx of Syrian refugees if the 
present Syrian regime continues as it will not be in their interest to have 
refugees leaving Syria. Border crossing are likely to be closed and people will 
have difficulties leaving Syria. 


 

. In addition to the newly arrived refugees, there are estimated 500,000-
600,000 migrants workers in Lebanon. Traditionally, these are 
unaccompanied men who work in Lebanon and then send money home to 
their families in Lebanon. There is a strong possibility that the on-going 
conflict may force the migrant workers to call their families to Lebanon. 


Response of International community 

Despite the presence of representative of the International Humanitarian 
community in both countries, they are not ready to cope with a large and sudden 
influx of refugees. 

 

UNHCR is working with HRC (High commission for Refugees) in registering refugees. 
However, they recognise that working with HRC is preventing some refugees 
registering with them for fear that their details will be handing over to the Syrian 
authorities. UNHCR has distributed food, winterisation items (fuel, winter clothing 
and blankets) and Baby Hygiene kits. A number of quick impact projects (Public 
Library, Agricultural tool project, Garden in Al Alaman village, Cinema club in Al 
Awadh) will be implemented to help the local community and refugees. UNHCR 
originally planned for 7,000 refugees, this figure has been reached, and UNHCR is 
now revising figures and funds accordingly. UNHCR is currently using ‘Emergency 
Operation Funds’ to fund current operations. Funds have been received from 


Germany (500,000 Euros), ECHO (500,000 Euros), Switzerland 250,000 Swiss Francs 
(plus Shelter expert) and Aga Khan Foundation (£800,000) 

 

DRC is working in Lebanon (in Bekaa Valley), supporting local government to build 
their capacity to help Syrian refugees. IMC, WHO and local health care centres are 
looking after child vaccinations (IMC received funding from Hariri Foundation). 
Caritas has sent 720 hygiene kits for distribution in the North of Lebanon. Qatar Red 
Crescent is also working in Lebanon distributing fresh food items (meat, vegetables 
and chicken) and hygiene kits to 500 refugee families and regularly co-ordinates their 
activities with Islamic Relief. 

 

ICRC is distributing winterisation items (blankets and other NFI) via Darul Fatwa 
organisation and supporting the Lebanese Red Cross in activities in the Lebanon. It is 
ICRC’s conclusion that the immediate needs of the current case loads (registered 
refugees) in Bekaa Valley are being met. ICRC is also looking at the end-to-end 
process of casualties coming out of Syria. According to their assessment, local 
organisation and facilities are able to provide medical assistance to casualties coming 
from Syria. However, the needs of the casualties at the beginning (before arriving at 
medical facilities) and at the end (post operative care) can be improved. 

 

DFID has sent an official to Beirut to monitor the humanitarian situation in the 
region. A meeting with was held with the British Ambassador to Lebanon and the 
DFID expert. They were impressed by the work IR was doing assisting the Syrian 
refugees. 

 

Response of the National organisation 

 

A number of organisations and individuals are channelling aid donated by Middle 
Eastern donors to the refugees in ad hoc basis. Lebanese Red Cross is playing an 
active role supported the ICRC. We have asked ISWA (IR Partner in Lebanon and 
another Lebanese local NGO to prepare for the possible upsurge in Syrian refugee 
arrivals into Lebanon and possibly working inside Syria, when there is an 
improvement in access. 

 

Islamic Relief’s response 

Islamic Relief was one of the first humanitarian agencies to respond to the needs of 
the Syrian Refugees. IR’s first distribution started in May 2011. Food and non food 
items, baby diapers (nappies) and baby milk have been distributed in Wadi Khaled 
and Bekaa Valley. Islamic Relief has been dealing with the mayors directly. One 
Mayer in particular, Ali Badawi (Mayor of Rama in Wadi Khaled) expressed gratitude 
for IR’s response and requested continued assistance. Upon hearing that 21 families 
share one washing machine in a community centre, a ‘one the spot’ decision was 
made by Moustafa Osman to provide the centre with three washing machines. This 


example of a quick response to dealing with difficulties faced by refugees and host 
families helps to increase the acceptance of IR by the refugee population. Islamic 
Relief in Lebanon has just received $50,000 to implement a project on behalf of IR 
Canada and a further project to the value of $150,000 is due to implemented soon. 

 

 

Challenges & concerns 

. Economic migrant: Between 500,000 – 600,000 economic Syrian workers are 
currently working in Lebanon. There is a strong possibility that the Syrian 
workers may bringing their families over to Lebanon. The status of these new 
arrivals is not clear. They will also create further pressure on the Lebanon 
government and society. A similar situation could also occur in Jordan. 


 

. Conflict spell over: Lebanon already has a quite number of Lebanese citizens 
that support of have affiliation with the Assad regime in Syria. Conversely, 
there are number of Lebanese Sunnis support the refugee arriving from Syria 
and those opposing the Assad regime. The intense rivalry between these two 
groups resulted in clashes and deaths in Tripoli (Lebanon). There is a 
potential the conflict in Syria could cause instability and conflict in Lebanon. 


 

. Domestic Politics: Some Lebanese political groups openly support the Assad 
regime whilst others express a support for the anti-Assad forces in private. 
This political divide may result in the reluctance of the Lebanese government 
offering clear support to the Syrian refugees as it may not want to seen to 
supporting one side against the others. 


 

 

 


