 

Logo 


 

 

 

OUTREACH ANALYSIS 

 

Background: Since August 2012, ICMC, with funding from BPRM, has been conducting 
a comprehensive outreach to vulnerable Syrian refugees in northern Jordan (Al-Mafraq, 
Ramtha, Irbid and Zarqa, Amman). To date a total of 925 Syrian households have been 
interviewed, collecting data on the family overview, health conditions, economic 
situation, the situation of children, housing conditions and gaps in assistance. 

 

Overview: The biographical data collected during the interviews reveal that the majority 
of Syrians are married (89%), though a significant number are widowed (6%) and 
overall, the educational level is low: 70% either have no formal education or did not 
continue their studies past the primary level (grades 1 -10). Only 4% completed further 
education at university or college. All households included in the outreach to date are 
Muslim. Of the 925 cases interviewed, 98% stated that they were unemployed. ICMC 
identified 14 households comprising only elderly people without relatives. 

 

 C:\Users\owner\Desktop\PHOTOS\GP3B0652.JPG


Figure 1: Syrian refugee family outside their home in Al-Mafraq 

Increasing numbers of households are registered with UNHCR as compared with 
preliminary outreach findings from March to June 2012. As of 14 November, UNHCR 
had registered 88,026 Syrian refugees in Jordan, representing 28,119 households. Of the 
households included in ICMC's outreach, a total of 84% were registered with UNHCR. 
When asked specifically if they would like to return to Syria, in the eventuality that the 
situation improves, 98% expressed their desire to return home. A total of 63% left Syria 
due to the general insecurity, while 36% fled due to perceived specific threats to their 
family. 


The vast majority (87%) has received assistance since their arrival to Jordan – 95% have 
received food assistance and a further 70% received basic NFIs. However, 123 cases 
claim they haven't received any assistance. Overwhelmingly, assistance received to date 
has been from local organisations and charities (83%) and UN agencies (43%). When 
asked about their urgent needs, respondents claimed that the assistance they have 
received is insufficient and said they are in desperate need specifically for rental 
assistance, winterisation assistance, help with sending the children to school (uniforms, 
transportation, books etc) and cash for food and bills. 

 

Fifty-five per cent of Syrian refugees included in ICMC's outreach suffer from a health 
condition, including chronic illnesses (50%), physical disability (35%) and psycho-social 
disorders, including trauma. 

 

Situation of Women and Children: The Syrian refugee population in Jordan is young, 
with approximately 54% of all Syrians registered with UNHCR under the age of 18 
years. Of the 5,433 individuals represented in the 925 households included in ICMC’s 
outreach, 3,065 (56%) are children under the age of 18 years. A total of 21% are under the 
age of six years. Altogether, ICMC identified 295 female-headed households - 
representing 32% of households included in the outreach to date. This correlates with 
UNHCR statistics which notes that 27% of registered Syrians are female-headed 
households, with women and children under 18 making up 73% of registrations with 
UNHCR. 

 

When asked about specific needs for children, a total of 491 families (53%) underlined a 
need for baby milk and nappies. Given that not all households include children aged 0-3 
years, this underlines the very real need for these items by nearly all families with young 
children. 

 

 C:\Users\owner\Documents\ICMC\Photos\Mission Photos\photo 5.jpeg


Figure 2: Born in exile, three generations of women, Al-Mafraq 


Of the households included in the outreach, 63% of 
children are not enrolled in school (although it 
should be noted that many households were 
interviewed before the start of the new school year). 
Furthermore, ICMC identified 27 orphans, seven 
unaccompanied minors, nine separated children and 
16 children who were sent out to work. Many more 
families admitted that they did not want to send 
their older children to school as they were looking 
for jobs for them, but as yet couldn’t find their 
children any work. 

 

Syrian Refugee Story 

Rima* fled to Jordan with her four 
daughters in July 2012. In April her 
husband, a rebel fighter, was killed. A 
month later, her youngest daughter 
was born. Rima now heads a female-
only household, struggling to make 
ends, raising a baby in exile and 
relying entirely on humanitarian 
assistance. 

 

The family applied to register with 
UNHCR and have been given an 
appointment in February 2013. Until 
then, with no documents to prove they 
are Syrian refugees, the older 
daughters can’t attend school. 

 

Rima’s main concern, however, is 
eldest daughter, Muna, who is eight 
months pregnant. Without papers she 
has no right to access the health 
facilities. And her husband is in 
detention in Syria. “Every hour of every 
day I worry about him,” she told ICMC. 
“He doesn’t know he will soon be a father.” 

 

 “Of course we want to return to Syria, 
it’s our home,” Rima told ICMC, trying 
to hold back her tears. “But I don’t know 
when it will be safe for us to go back. 
Until then what can we do? We have no 
money, I can’t pay the rent. Soon we will 
have two babies in the house … how will 
we keep warm this winter?” 

 

* Names have been changed 

Housing / Shelter: ICMC has a permanent presence 
in northern Jordan (with a sub-office in Al-Mafraq) 
and has identified rental assistance as a foremost 
need for the majority of vulnerable Syrians in Jordan 
who don’t live in the camp. This has also been 
underlined in ECHO's Humanitarian 
Implementation Plan (HIP) for Syrian refugees, as 
well as various INGO assessments. 

 

ICMC interviewed families who share houses with 
Jordan host families, or with other Syrian refugee 
families, live in cramped conditions with no privacy, 
or are forced to rent sub-standard accommodation at 
inflated prices (see figure 1). Some have even tried to 
return to UNHCR facilities as, unable to pay rent, are 
faced with eviction. Since the opening of Za'atri 
refugee camp in July 2012, new arrivals are being 
sheltered in the camp. However, the majority of 
refugees in Jordan still reside within the host 
community. Refugee camps are an option of last 
resort and it is essential to support the families 
within the local community wherever possible. 

 

According to the outreach, 97% live in unfurnished 
accommodation. As seen during the home visits, 
these refugees live in bare rooms with only the basic 
household items, such as mattresses and blankets, pots and pans. Regarding housing 
conditions, 27% of respondents report that there are more than 8 occupants sharing the 
accommodation and 8% reported more than 12 residents. Some 12% of respondents live 
in a one-room accommodation and 52% live in two rooms. The overwhelming majority 
of households has access to a private bathroom and kitchen, and has water and 
electricity supply, and feel safe in their homes. However, housing conditions are not 
ideal and respondents complain of damp (23%) and the lack of privacy (14%). 


Rent and bills constitute a significant percentage of most families' expenditure, whereby 
52% of respondents spend more than 101 JD / month in rent. Given that 32% of 
respondents have monthly expenses of between 101 – 300 JD /month, and a further 61% 
have monthly expenses of between 301 – 600 JD /month, rent represents a very 
significant percentage of the average refugees' expenditure. Meanwhile, 25% of 
households claim they have no income whatsoever and only 2% earn an income in 
Jordan: Refugees are relying on humanitarian assistance and meagre savings from Syria 
and women are selling their dowry gold to survive. 

 

 C:\Users\owner\Desktop\PHOTOS\GP3B9887.JPG


Figure 3: ICMC interviewing family in Al-Mafraq 

 C:\Users\owner\Desktop\PHOTOS\GP3B0623.JPG


Figure 4: Female-headed household in Al-Mafraq 


